1. Clin Chim Acta. 2023 Aug 1;548:117519. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117519. Epub 2023 
Aug 16.

Advancing AI in healthcare: A comprehensive review of best practices.

Polevikov S(1).

Author information:
(1)WellAI, LLC, Sheridan, WY, USA.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are powerful tools 
shaping the healthcare sector. This review considers twelve key aspects of AI in 
clinical practice: 1) Ethical AI; 2) Explainable AI; 3) Health Equity and Bias 
in AI; 4) Sponsorship Bias; 5) Data Privacy; 6) Genomics and Privacy; 7) 
Insufficient Sample Size and Self-Serving Bias; 8) Bridging the Gap Between 
Training Datasets and Real-World Scenarios; 9) Open Source and Collaborative 
Development; 10) Dataset Bias and Synthetic Data; 11) Measurement Bias; 12) 
Reproducibility in AI Research. These categories represent both the challenges 
and opportunities of AI implementation in healthcare. While AI holds significant 
potential for improving patient care, it also presents risks and challenges, 
such as ensuring privacy, combating bias, and maintaining transparency and 
ethics. The review underscores the necessity of developing comprehensive best 
practices for healthcare organizations and fostering a diverse dialogue 
involving data scientists, clinicians, patient advocates, ethicists, economists, 
and policymakers. We are at the precipice of significant transformation in 
healthcare powered by AI. By continuing to reassess and refine our approach, we 
can ensure that AI is implemented responsibly and ethically, maximizing its 
benefit to patient care and public health.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117519
PMID: 37595864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


2. BMJ. 2021 Sep 1;374:n1872. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n1872.

Use of artificial intelligence for image analysis in breast cancer screening 
programmes: systematic review of test accuracy.

Freeman K(1), Geppert J(1), Stinton C(1), Todkill D(1), Johnson S(1), Clarke 
A(1), Taylor-Phillips S(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Health Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(2)Division of Health Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK 
S.Taylor-Phillips@warwick.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2021 Nov 20;398(10314):1867. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)02484-3.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the accuracy of artificial intelligence (AI) for the 
detection of breast cancer in mammography screening practice.
DESIGN: Systematic review of test accuracy studies.
DATA SOURCES: Medline, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews from 1 January 2010 to 17 May 2021.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Studies reporting test accuracy of AI algorithms, alone or 
in combination with radiologists, to detect cancer in women's digital mammograms 
in screening practice, or in test sets. Reference standard was biopsy with 
histology or follow-up (for screen negative women). Outcomes included test 
accuracy and cancer type detected.
STUDY SELECTION AND SYNTHESIS: Two reviewers independently assessed articles for 
inclusion and assessed the methodological quality of included studies using the 
QUality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 (QUADAS-2) tool. A single 
reviewer extracted data, which were checked by a second reviewer. Narrative data 
synthesis was performed.
RESULTS: Twelve studies totalling 131 822 screened women were included. No 
prospective studies measuring test accuracy of AI in screening practice were 
found. Studies were of poor methodological quality. Three retrospective studies 
compared AI systems with the clinical decisions of the original radiologist, 
including 79 910 women, of whom 1878 had screen detected cancer or interval 
cancer within 12 months of screening. Thirty four (94%) of 36 AI systems 
evaluated in these studies were less accurate than a single radiologist, and all 
were less accurate than consensus of two or more radiologists. Five smaller 
studies (1086 women, 520 cancers) at high risk of bias and low generalisability 
to the clinical context reported that all five evaluated AI systems (as 
standalone to replace radiologist or as a reader aid) were more accurate than a 
single radiologist reading a test set in the laboratory. In three studies, AI 
used for triage screened out 53%, 45%, and 50% of women at low risk but also 
10%, 4%, and 0% of cancers detected by radiologists.
CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence for AI does not yet allow judgement of its 
accuracy in breast cancer screening programmes, and it is unclear where on the 
clinical pathway AI might be of most benefit. AI systems are not sufficiently 
specific to replace radiologist double reading in screening programmes. 
Promising results in smaller studies are not replicated in larger studies. 
Prospective studies are required to measure the effect of AI in clinical 
practice. Such studies will require clear stopping rules to ensure that AI does 
not reduce programme specificity.
STUDY REGISTRATION: Protocol registered as PROSPERO CRD42020213590.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.n1872
PMCID: PMC8409323
PMID: 34470740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and 
declare: CS, ST-P, KF, JG, and AC have received funding from the UK National 
Screening Committee for the conduct of the review; ST-P is funded by the 
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) through a career development 
fellowship; AC is partly supported by the NIHR Applied Research Collaboration 
West Midlands; SJ and DT have nothing to declare; no other relationships or 
activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.


3. J Med Internet Res. 2024 Dec 23;26:e54676. doi: 10.2196/54676.

Machine Learning and Deep Learning for Diagnosis of Lumbar Spinal Stenosis: 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Wang T(#)(1), Chen R(#)(1), Fan N(#)(1), Zang L(1), Yuan S(1), Du P(1), Wu Q(1), 
Wang A(1), Li J(1), Kong X(1), Zhu W(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) is a major cause of pain and disability 
in older individuals worldwide. Although increasing studies of traditional 
machine learning (TML) and deep learning (DL) were conducted in the field of 
diagnosing LSS and gained prominent results, the performance of these models has 
not been analyzed systematically.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to pool the results 
and evaluate the heterogeneity of the current studies in using TML or DL models 
to diagnose LSS, thereby providing more comprehensive information for further 
clinical application.
METHODS: This review was performed under the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items 
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines using articles extracted 
from PubMed, Embase databases, and Cochrane Library databases. Studies that 
evaluated DL or TML algorithms assessment value on diagnosing LSS were included, 
while those with duplicated or unavailable data were excluded. Quality 
Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies 2 was used to estimate the risk of 
bias in each study. The MIDAS module and the METAPROP module of Stata 
(StataCorp) were used for data synthesis and statistical analyses.
RESULTS: A total of 12 studies with 15,044 patients reported the assessment 
value of TML or DL models for diagnosing LSS. The risk of bias assessment 
yielded 4 studies with high risk of bias, 3 with unclear risk of bias, and 5 
with completely low risk of bias. The pooled sensitivity and specificity were 
0.84 (95% CI: 0.82-0.86; I2=99.06%) and 0.87 (95% CI 0.84-0.90; I2=98.7%), 
respectively. The diagnostic odds ratio was 36 (95% CI 26-49), the positive 
likelihood ratio (LR+) was 6.6 (95% CI 5.1-8.4), and the negative likelihood 
ratio (LR-) was 0.18 (95% CI 0.16-0.21). The summary receiver operating 
characteristic curves, the area under the curve of TML or DL models for 
diagnosing LSS of 0.92 (95% CI 0.89-0.94), indicating a high diagnostic value.
CONCLUSIONS: This systematic review and meta-analysis emphasize that despite the 
generally satisfactory diagnostic performance of artificial intelligence systems 
in the experimental stage for the diagnosis of LSS, none of them is reliable and 
practical enough to apply in real clinical practice. Further efforts, including 
optimization of model balance, widely accepted objective reference standards, 
multimodal strategy, large dataset for training and testing, external 
validation, and sufficient and scientific report, should be made to bridge the 
distance between current TML or DL models and real-life clinical applications in 
future studies.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42024566535; https://tinyurl.com/msx59x8k.

©Tianyi Wang, Ruiyuan Chen, Ning Fan, Lei Zang, Shuo Yuan, Peng Du, Qichao Wu, 
Aobo Wang, Jian Li, Xiaochuan Kong, Wenyi Zhu. Originally published in the 
Journal of Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 23.12.2024.

DOI: 10.2196/54676
PMCID: PMC11704645
PMID: 39715552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


4. Clin Chim Acta. 2025 Jun 15;574:120341. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2025.120341. Epub 
2025 May 3.

Artificial intelligence (AI) in point-of-care testing.

Pillay TS(1), Khan AI(2), Yenice S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences and National 
Health Laboratory Service, Tshwane Academic Division, University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria, South Africa; Division of Chemical Pathology, Department of Pathology, 
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. Electronic address: 
tspillay@gmail.com.
(2)Dept. of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Lewis Katz School of Medicine, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Group Florence Nightingale Hospitals, Istanbul, Türkiye.

The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into point-of-care testing 
(POCT) represents a transformative leap in modern healthcare, addressing 
critical challenges in diagnostic accuracy, workflow efficiency, and equitable 
access. While POCT has revolutionized decentralized care through rapid results, 
its potential is hindered by variability in accuracy, integration hurdles, and 
resource constraints. AI technologies-encompassing machine learning, deep 
learning, and natural language processing-offer robust solutions: convolutional 
neural networks improve malaria detection in sub-Saharan Africa to 95 % 
sensitivity, while predictive analytics reduce device downtime by 20 % in 
resource-limited settings. AI-driven decision support systems curtail antibiotic 
misuse by 40 % through real-time data synthesis, and portable AI devices enable 
anaemia screening in rural India with 94 % accuracy, slashing diagnostic delays 
from weeks to hours. Despite these advancements, challenges persist, including 
data privacy risks, algorithmic opacity, and infrastructural gaps in low- and 
middle-income countries. Explainable AI frameworks and blockchain encryption are 
critical to building clinician trust and ensuring regulatory compliance. Future 
directions emphasize the convergence of AI with Internet of Things (IoT) and 
blockchain for predictive diagnostics, as demonstrated by AI-IoT systems 
forecasting dengue outbreaks 14 days in advance. Personalized medicine, powered 
by genomic and wearable data integration, further underscores AI potential to 
tailor therapies, reducing cardiovascular events by 25 %. Realizing this vision 
demands interdisciplinary collaboration, ethical governance, and equitable 
implementation to bridge global health disparities. By harmonizing innovation 
with accessibility, AI-enhanced POCT emerges as a cornerstone of proactive, 
patient-centered healthcare, poised to democratize diagnostics and drive 
sustainable health equity worldwide.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2025.120341
PMID: 40324611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


5. Magn Reson Imaging. 2022 May;88:89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.mri.2022.01.018. Epub 
2022 Feb 3.

A data-driven deep learning pipeline for quantitative susceptibility mapping 
(QSM).

Wang Z(1), Xia P(1), Huang F(1), Wei H(2), Hui ES(3), Mak HK(1), Cao P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China; Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. Electronic address: caopeng1@hku.hk.

PURPOSE: This study developed a data-driven optimization to improve the accuracy 
of deep learning QSM quantification.
METHODS: The proposed deep learning QSM pipeline consisted of two projections 
onto convex set (POCS) models designed to decouple trainable network components 
with the spherical mean value (SMV) filters and dipole kernel in the data-driven 
optimization. They were a background field removal network (named POCSnet1) and 
a dipole inversion network (named POCSnet2). Both POCSnet1 and POCSnet2 were the 
unrolled V-Net with iterative data-driven optimization to enforce the data 
fidelity. For training POCSnet1, we simulated phantom data with random geometric 
shapes as the background susceptibility sources. For training POCSnet2, we used 
geometric shapes to mimic the QSM. The evaluation was performed on synthetic 
data, a public COSMOS (N = 1), and clinical data from a Parkinson's disease 
cohort (N = 71) and small-vessel disease cohort (N = 26). For comparison, DLL2, 
FINE, and autoQSM, were implemented and tested under the same experimental 
setting.
RESULTS: On COSMOS, results from POCSnet1 were more similar to that of the 
V-SHARP method with NRMSE = 23.7% and SSIM = 0.995, compared with the 
NRMSE = 62.7% and SSIM = 0.975 for SHARQnet, a naïve V-Net model. On COSMOS, the 
NRMSE and HFEN for POCSnet2 were 58.1% and 56.7%; while for DLL2, FINE, and 
autoQSM, they were 62.0% and 61.2%, 69.8% and 67.5%, and 87.5% and 85.3%, 
respectively. On the Parkinson's disease cohort, our results were consistent 
with those obtained from VSHARP+STAR-QSM with biases <3% and outperformed the 
SHARQnet+DeepQSM that had biases of 7% to 10%. The sensitivity of cerebral 
microbleed detection using our pipeline was 100%, compared with 92% by 
SHARQnet+DeepQSM.
CONCLUSION: Data-driven optimization improved the accuracy of QSM quantification 
compared with that of naïve V-Net models.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mri.2022.01.018
PMID: 35124180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Headache Pain. 2025 Sep 2;26(1):192. doi: 10.1186/s10194-025-02143-8.

Artificial intelligence in headache medicine: between automation and the 
doctor-patient relationship. A systematic review.

Espinoza-Vinces C(#)(1), Martínez MC(#)(2), Atorrasagasti-Villar A(1), Rodríguez 
MDMG(1), Ezpeleta D(3), Irimia P(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Department of Neurology, Hospital Occidente de Kennedy, Bogota, Colombia.
(3)Neurology Department, Quirónsalud Madrid University Hospital. Pozuelo de 
Alarcón, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Neurology, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. 
pirimia@unav.es.
(5)Navarra Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain. 
pirimia@unav.es.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Headache disorders, particularly migraine, are highly prevalent, but 
often remain underdiagnosed and undertreated. Artificial intelligence (AI) 
offers promising applications in diagnosis, prediction of attacks, analysis of 
neuroimaging and neurophysiology data, and treatment selection. Its use in 
headache medicine raises ethical, regulatory, and clinical questions, including 
its impact on the doctor-patient relationship.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted on April 10, 2025, across 
PubMed, Cochrane Library, Scopus, Web of Science, and DOAJ, following PRISMA 
guidelines. Two reviewers independently applied strict inclusion criteria to 
select studies published from 2000 to 2025 in either English or Spanish. Risk of 
bias was assessed using validated tools tailored to study design, including the 
Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 (QUADAS-2), Prediction Model 
Risk of Bias Assessment Tool (PROBAST), Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS), and 
Appraisal Tool for Cross-Sectional Studies (AXIS).
RESULTS: A total of 76 studies were included in the qualitative synthesis. The 
analysis covered AI methodologies, clinical applications, patient perspectives, 
and ethical implications. AI tools have shown potential to improve diagnostic 
accuracy, headache subtype classification, and prediction of treatment response, 
and may help reduce the administrative burden in clinical practice. Emerging 
technologies such as digital twins, wearable biomarker monitoring, and synthetic 
data generation support personalized approaches and may reshape clinical 
research. However, significant challenges remain. These include data quality, 
model interpretability, algorithmic bias, privacy concerns, and regulatory gaps. 
Moreover, the evidence base is still developing, with expectations often 
exceeding the strength of available clinical data. Many studies present 
methodological limitations due to small sample sizes, selection bias, and lack 
of external validation, which limit their generalizability to real-world 
settings. Finally, concerns about depersonalization and transparency affect 
patient trust in AI, reinforcing the need for both human oversight and a 
patient-centered approach.
CONCLUSIONS: AI holds promise for improving headache care, but evidence 
supporting its clinical utility is still limited. Integration into practice must 
be rigorously validated, ethically guided, and carefully designed to prevent 
depersonalization. Human oversight remains essential as AI should complement, 
not replace, clinical judgment.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10194-025-02143-8
PMCID: PMC12406602
PMID: 40898015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests. Dr. Pablo Irimia has 
received personal fees for Speaker/travel grants from Teva, Allergan/Abbvie, Eli 
Lilly, Organon, Lundbeck, Novartis, Dr. Reddy’s and Pfizer.


7. Curr Oncol. 2025 Jun 9;32(6):338. doi: 10.3390/curroncol32060338.

Artificial Intelligence in Laryngeal Cancer Detection: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis.

Alabdalhussein A(1), Al-Khafaji MH(1), Al-Busairi R(2), Al-Dabbagh S(2), Khan 
W(1), Anwar F(3), Raheem TS(2), Elkrim M(1), Sahota RB(4), Mair M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester 
LE1 5WW, UK.
(2)Independent Researcher, Leicester LE2 2AD, UK.
(3)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospitals of Leicester, 
Leicester LE1 5WW, UK.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, University Hospitals of Derby and Burton, Derby 
DE22 3NE, UK.

(1) Background: The early detection of laryngeal cancer is crucial for achieving 
superior patient outcomes and preserving laryngeal function. Artificial 
intelligence (AI) methodologies can expedite the triage of suspicious laryngeal 
lesions, thereby diminishing the critical timeframe required for clinical 
intervention. (2) Methods: We included all studies published up to February 
2025. We conducted a systematic search across five major databases: MEDLINE, 
EMCARE, EMBASE, PubMed, and the Cochrane Library. We included 15 studies, with a 
total of 17,559 patients. A risk of bias assessment was performed using the 
QUADAS-2 tool. We conducted data synthesis using the Meta Disc 1.4 program. (3) 
Results: A meta-analysis revealed that AI demonstrated high sensitivity (78%) 
and specificity (86%), with a Pooled Diagnostic Odds Ratio of 53.77 (95% CI: 
27.38 to 105.62) in detecting laryngeal cancer. The subset analysis revealed 
that CNN-based AI models are superior to non-CNN-based models in image analysis 
and lesion detection. (4) Conclusions: AI can be used in real-world settings due 
to its diagnostic accuracy, high sensitivity, and specificity.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol32060338
PMCID: PMC12191837
PMID: 40558281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


8. Med Decis Making. 2023 Apr;43(3):275-287. doi: 10.1177/0272989X221141381. Epub 
2022 Dec 13.

Mimicking Clinical Trials Using Real-World Data: A Novel Method and 
Applications.

Wang WJ(1), Bansal A(1), Bennette CS(1), Basu A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Comparative Health Outcomes, Policy, and Economics (CHOICE) Institute, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Health Services, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Economics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Simulating individual-level trial data when only summary data are 
available is often useful for meta-analysis, forming external control arms and 
calibrating trial results to real-world data (RWD). The joint distribution of 
baseline characteristics in a trial is usually simulated by combining its 
summary data with RWD's correlations. However, RWD correlations may not be a 
perfect proxy for the trial. A misspecified correlation structure could bias any 
analysis in which the outcomes generating models are nonlinear or include effect 
modifiers.
METHODS: We developed an iterative algorithm using copula and resampling, which 
was based on the estimated propensity score for the likelihood of enrollment in 
a trial given participants' characteristics. Validation was performed using 
Monte Carlo simulations under different scenarios in which the marginal and 
joint distributions of covariates differ between trial samples and RWD. Two 
applications were illustrated using an actual trial and the Surveillance, 
Epidemiology, and End Results-Medicare data. We calculated the standardized mean 
difference (SMD) to assess the generalizability of the trial and explored the 
feasibility of generating an external control by applying a parametric Weibull 
model trained in RWD to predict survival in the simulated trial cohort.
RESULTS: Across all scenarios, approximated correlations derived from the 
algorithm were closer to the true correlations than the RWD's correlations. The 
algorithm also successfully reproduced the joint distribution of characteristics 
for the actual trial. A similar SMD was observed using simulated data and 
individual-level trial data. The 95% confidence intervals were overlapped 
between adjusted survival estimates from the simulated trial and actual trial 
Kaplan-Meier estimates.
CONCLUSIONS: The algorithm could be a feasible way to simulate individual-level 
data when only summary data are available. Further research is needed to 
validate our approach with larger sample sizes.
HIGHLIGHTS: The correlation structure is crucial to building the joint 
distribution of patient characteristics, and a misspecified correlation 
structure could potentially influence predicted outcomes.An iterative algorithm 
was developed to approximate a trial's correlation structure using published 
summary trial data and real-world data.The algorithm could be a feasible way to 
simulate individual-level trial data when only trial summary data are available.

DOI: 10.1177/0272989X221141381
PMID: 36511448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2023 May 18;302:352-353. doi: 10.3233/SHTI230136.

Domain Knowledge-Driven Generation of Synthetic Healthcare Data.

Hashemi AS(1), Soliman A(1), Lundström J(1), Etminani K(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Applied Intelligent Systems Research in Health, Halmstad 
University, Sweden.

Healthcare longitudinal data collected around patients' life cycles, today offer 
a multitude of opportunities for healthcare transformation utilizing artificial 
intelligence algorithms. However, access to "real" healthcare data is a big 
challenge due to ethical and legal reasons. There is also a need to deal with 
challenges around electronic health records (EHRs) including biased, 
heterogeneity, imbalanced data, and small sample sizes. In this study, we 
introduce a domain knowledge-driven framework for generating synthetic EHRs, as 
an alternative to methods only using EHR data or expert knowledge. By leveraging 
external medical knowledge sources in the training algorithm, the suggested 
framework is designed to maintain data utility, fidelity, and clinical validity 
while preserving patient privacy.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI230136
PMID: 37203680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Rev Urol. 2026 Jan;23(1):13-28. doi: 10.1038/s41585-025-01070-2. Epub 2025 
Aug 4.

The state of the art in artificial intelligence and digital pathology in 
prostate cancer.

Ni HM(#)(1), Kouzy R(#)(2), Sabbagh A(#)(3), Rooney MK(2), Feng J(4), Castillo 
SP(2), Gadoue SM(2), El Kouzi Z(2), Hoffman K(2), Yuan Y(2), Madabhushi A(5), 
Mohamad O(6).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(6)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. omohamad@mdanderson.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Prostate cancer is among the most common cancers worldwide, with ~1.5 million 
new diagnoses globally every year. The sheer mass of data becoming available on 
prostate cancer, as well as other types of cancer, is increasing exponentially. 
The growth of digital pathology has particularly sparked interest in developing 
artificial intelligence (AI) approaches to data synthesis to predict cancer 
grade and outcomes in men with prostate cancer. Progress has been made in this 
field, particularly in applications for diagnosis, prognosis and inferring 
molecular alterations, but several challenges remain. Variability in tissue 
processing and scanning contribute to dataset heterogeneity. The absence of 
well-annotated, multi-institutional databases hinders AI model development and 
generalization of model performances across clinical settings. Regulatory 
frameworks for AI-driven diagnostics remain nascent. Moreover, bias in training 
datasets skewing against under-represented demographic groups poses a 
fundamental challenge to developing equitable models. By mapping contemporary 
evidence around each of these hurdles and identifying tangible interventions, we 
can advance AI-augmented digital pathology towards reliable and generalizable 
tools to improve prostate cancer care.

© 2025. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41585-025-01070-2
PMID: 40760335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: A.M. discloses several 
commercial and institutional relationships in the field of medical imaging and 
computational pathology. He maintains a leadership position at Inspirata and 
holds equity interests in both Inspirata and Elucid Bioimaging. His advisory 
activities include consulting roles with Merck, Aiforia, Roche, Caris Life 
Sciences and Cernostics, and he has received honoraria from AstraZeneca and 
Inspirata. His research programme benefits from institutional funding support 
from multiple industry partners, including Inspirata, Philips Healthcare, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim. Additionally, A.M. 
reports intellectual property relationships, with patents licensed through his 
institution to both Inspirata Inc. and Elucid Bioimaging. All other authors 
declare no competing interests.


11. Pain Res Manag. 2021 Apr 24;2021:6659133. doi: 10.1155/2021/6659133. eCollection 
2021.

Machine Learning and Intelligent Diagnostics in Dental and Orofacial Pain 
Management: A Systematic Review.

Farook TH(1), Jamayet NB(2), Abdullah JY(3), Alam MK(4).

Author information:
(1)Maxillofacial Prosthetic Service, Prosthodontic Unit, School of Dental 
Sciences, UniversitiSains Malaysia, Health Campus, Kelantan 16150, Malaysia.
(2)Division of Clinical Dentistry (Prosthodontics), School of Dentistry, 
International Medical University, Kuala Lumpur 57000, Malaysia.
(3)Craniofacial Imaging and Additive Manufacturing Laboratory, School of Dental 
Sciences, UniversitiSains Malaysia, Health Campus, Kelantan 16150, Malaysia.
(4)College of Dentistry, Jouf University, Sakaka, Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: The study explored the clinical influence, effectiveness, limitations, 
and human comparison outcomes of machine learning in diagnosing (1) dental 
diseases, (2) periodontal diseases, (3) trauma and neuralgias, (4) cysts and 
tumors, (5) glandular disorders, and (6) bone and temporomandibular joint as 
possible causes of dental and orofacial pain.
METHOD: Scopus, PubMed, and Web of Science (all databases) were searched by 2 
reviewers until 29th October 2020. Articles were screened and narratively 
synthesized according to PRISMA-DTA guidelines based on predefined eligibility 
criteria. Articles that made direct reference test comparisons to human 
clinicians were evaluated using the MI-CLAIM checklist. The risk of bias was 
assessed by JBI-DTA critical appraisal, and certainty of the evidence was 
evaluated using the GRADE approach. Information regarding the quantification 
method of dental pain and disease, the conditional characteristics of both 
training and test data cohort in the machine learning, diagnostic outcomes, and 
diagnostic test comparisons with clinicians, where applicable, were extracted.
RESULTS: 34 eligible articles were found for data synthesis, of which 8 articles 
made direct reference comparisons to human clinicians. 7 papers scored over 13 
(out of the evaluated 15 points) in the MI-CLAIM approach with all papers 
scoring 5+ (out of 7) in JBI-DTA appraisals. GRADE approach revealed serious 
risks of bias and inconsistencies with most studies containing more positive 
cases than their true prevalence in order to facilitate machine learning. 
Patient-perceived symptoms and clinical history were generally found to be less 
reliable than radiographs or histology for training accurate machine learning 
models. A low agreement level between clinicians training the models was 
suggested to have a negative impact on the prediction accuracy. Reference 
comparisons found nonspecialized clinicians with less than 3 years of experience 
to be disadvantaged against trained models.
CONCLUSION: Machine learning in dental and orofacial healthcare has shown 
respectable results in diagnosing diseases with symptomatic pain and with 
improved future iterations and can be used as a diagnostic aid in the clinics. 
The current review did not internally analyze the machine learning models and 
their respective algorithms, nor consider the confounding variables and factors 
responsible for shaping the orofacial disorders responsible for eliciting pain.

Copyright © 2021 Taseef Hasan Farook et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6659133
PMCID: PMC8093041
PMID: 33986900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflicts of interest.


12. Ann Intern Med. 2024 Apr;177(4):484-496. doi: 10.7326/M23-2960. Epub 2024 Mar 
12.

The Impact of Health Care Algorithms on Racial and Ethnic Disparities : A 
Systematic Review.

Siddique SM(1), Tipton K(2), Leas B(3), Jepson C(2), Aysola J(4), Cohen JB(5), 
Flores E(3), Harhay MO(6), Schmidt H(7), Weissman GE(8), Fricke J(3), Treadwell 
JR(2), Mull NK(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania; Leonard Davis 
Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania; and Center for 
Evidence-Based Practice, Penn Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (S.M.S.).
(2)ECRI-Penn Medicine Evidence-based Practice Center, ECRI, Plymouth Meeting, 
Pennsylvania (K.T., C.J., J.R.T.).
(3)Center for Evidence-Based Practice, Penn Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
(B.L., E.F., J.F.).
(4)Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania; 
Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania; and Penn 
Medicine Center for Health Equity Advancement, Penn Medicine, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania (J.A.).
(5)Division of Renal-Electrolyte and Hypertension, University of Pennsylvania; 
and Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (J.B.C.).
(6)Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania; 
Center for Evidence-Based Practice, Penn Medicine; Department of Biostatistics, 
Epidemiology, and Informatics, University of Pennsylvania; and Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania (M.O.H.).
(7)Department of Medical Ethics & Health Policy, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (H.S.).
(8)Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania; 
Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, University of 
Pennsylvania; and Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (G.E.W.).
(9)Center for Evidence-Based Practice, Penn Medicine; and Division of Hospital 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (N.K.M.).

BACKGROUND: There is increasing concern for the potential impact of health care 
algorithms on racial and ethnic disparities.
PURPOSE: To examine the evidence on how health care algorithms and associated 
mitigation strategies affect racial and ethnic disparities.
DATA SOURCES: Several databases were searched for relevant studies published 
from 1 January 2011 to 30 September 2023.
STUDY SELECTION: Using predefined criteria and dual review, studies were 
screened and selected to determine: 1) the effect of algorithms on racial and 
ethnic disparities in health and health care outcomes and 2) the effect of 
strategies or approaches to mitigate racial and ethnic bias in the development, 
validation, dissemination, and implementation of algorithms.
DATA EXTRACTION: Outcomes of interest (that is, access to health care, quality 
of care, and health outcomes) were extracted with risk-of-bias assessment using 
the ROBINS-I (Risk Of Bias In Non-randomised Studies - of Interventions) tool 
and adapted CARE-CPM (Critical Appraisal for Racial and Ethnic Equity in 
Clinical Prediction Models) equity extension.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Sixty-three studies (51 modeling, 4 retrospective, 2 
prospective, 5 prepost studies, and 1 randomized controlled trial) were 
included. Heterogenous evidence on algorithms was found to: a) reduce 
disparities (for example, the revised kidney allocation system), b) perpetuate 
or exacerbate disparities (for example, severity-of-illness scores applied to 
critical care resource allocation), and/or c) have no statistically significant 
effect on select outcomes (for example, the HEART Pathway [history, 
electrocardiogram, age, risk factors, and troponin]). To mitigate disparities, 7 
strategies were identified: removing an input variable, replacing a variable, 
adding race, adding a non-race-based variable, changing the racial and ethnic 
composition of the population used in model development, creating separate 
thresholds for subpopulations, and modifying algorithmic analytic techniques.
LIMITATION: Results are mostly based on modeling studies and may be highly 
context-specific.
CONCLUSION: Algorithms can mitigate, perpetuate, and exacerbate racial and 
ethnic disparities, regardless of the explicit use of race and ethnicity, but 
evidence is heterogeneous. Intentionality and implementation of the algorithm 
can impact the effect on disparities, and there may be tradeoffs in outcomes.
PRIMARY FUNDING SOURCE: Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research.

DOI: 10.7326/M23-2960
PMID: 38467001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at 
www.acponline.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M23-2960.


13. Crit Care Med. 2025 Nov 1;53(11):e2271-e2281. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006818. 
Epub 2025 Aug 14.

Lung Ultrasound Findings and Algorithms to Detect Pneumonia: A Systematic Review 
and Diagnostic Testing Meta-Analysis.

Padrao EMH(1)(2), Caldeira Antonio B(3), Gardner TA(1)(2), Miyawaki IA(3), Gomes 
C(4), Riceto Loyola Junior JE(5), Daibes Rachid de Andrade M(6), Reis Marques 
I(6), Azevedo Ferreira de Souza I(7), Hellen Azevedo da Silva C(8), Caporal 
Salles Moreira V(9), Pablo Bustos B(2)(10), Barreto do Amaral Neto A(11), Rubin 
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA.
(3)School of Medicine, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil.
(4)Department of Medicine, UCHealth Parkview Medical Center, Pueblo, CO.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Instituto do Coração do Hospital das Clínicas da 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Riverside Methodist Hospital, OhioHealth, Columbus, 
OH.
(8)School of Medicine, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, Rio 
Grande do Norte, Brazil.
(9)University Israelita de Ciências da Saúde Albert Einstein, São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.
(11)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH.

OBJECTIVE: Lung ultrasound is increasingly used for diagnosing pneumonia due to 
its accessibility, low cost, and lack of radiation exposure. This systematic 
review and meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of individual 
lung ultrasound findings and algorithms for pneumonia across various clinical 
settings compared with chest radiography and CT.
DATA SOURCES: We systematically searched PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: We searched for studies assessing the 
sensitivity and specificity of lung ultrasound findings and algorithms for 
pneumonia. Studies including adult patients with community-acquired, 
hospital-acquired, or ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) were eligible. Data 
on sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios for ultrasonographic findings 
and algorithms were pooled using bivariate linear mixed models and Bayesian 
analyses. The risk of bias was assessed using the Quality Assessment of 
Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 tool.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Twenty-six studies, totaling 3454 patients, were included. The 
Bed Lung Ultrasound in Emergency (BLUE) protocol demonstrated the highest 
sensitivity (0.88; 95% CI, 0.84-0.92) among all criteria studies, whereas 
dynamic air bronchograms had the highest specificity (0.96; 95% CI, 0.91-0.99). 
Focal B-lines had low sensitivity (0.24; 95% CI, 0.12-0.43) and high specificity 
(0.96; 95% CI, 0.86-0.99). Sensitivity analyses indicated reduced specificity 
for lung ultrasound in patients with VAP across all evaluated criteria. Bayesian 
analyses yielded consistent results across different prior assumptions.
CONCLUSIONS: Lung ultrasound demonstrates good diagnostic performance for 
detecting community-acquired and hospital-acquired pneumonia. However, its 
utility in diagnosing VAP is limited, suggesting the need for complementary 
diagnostic tools in this patient group. This underscores the importance of lung 
ultrasound as a frontline diagnostic tool for pneumonia. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first meta-analysis to evaluate the specificity and 
sensitivity of each specific finding identified by lung ultrasound.

Copyright © 2025 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer 
Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006818
PMID: 40810585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have disclosed that they do not have 
any potential conflicts of interest.


14. J Orthod. 2024 Jun;51(2):107-119. doi: 10.1177/14653125231203743. Epub 2023 Sep 
29.

Artificial intelligence for treatment planning and soft tissue outcome 
prediction of orthognathic treatment: A systematic review.

Salazar D(1), Rossouw PE(1), Javed F(1), Michelogiannakis D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Eastman Institute for 
Oral Health, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: The accuracy of artificial intelligence (AI) in treatment planning 
and outcome prediction in orthognathic treatment (OGT) has not been 
systematically reviewed.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the accuracy of AI in treatment planning and soft 
tissue outcome prediction in OGT.
DESIGN: Systematic review.
DATA SOURCES: Unrestricted search of indexed databases and reference lists of 
included studies.
DATA SELECTION: Clinical studies that addressed the focused question 'Is AI 
useful for treatment planning and soft tissue outcome prediction in OGT?' were 
included.
DATA EXTRACTION: Study screening, selection and data extraction were performed 
independently by two authors. The risk of bias (RoB) was assessed using the 
Cochrane Collaboration's RoB and ROBINS-I tools for randomised and 
non-randomised clinical studies, respectively.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Eight clinical studies (seven retrospective cohort studies and 
one randomised controlled study) were included. Four studies assessed the role 
of AI for treatment decision making; and four studies assessed the accuracy of 
AI in soft tissue outcome prediction after OGT. In four studies, the level of 
agreement between AI and non-AI decision making was found to be clinically 
acceptable (at least 90%). In four studies, it was shown that AI can be used for 
soft tissue outcome prediction after OGT; however, predictions were not 
clinically acceptable for the lip and chin areas. All studies had a low to 
moderate RoB.
LIMITATIONS: Due to high methodological inconsistencies among the included 
studies, it was not possible to conduct a meta-analysis and reporting biases 
assessment.
CONCLUSION: AI can be a useful aid to traditional treatment planning by 
facilitating clinical treatment decision making and providing a visualisation 
tool for soft tissue outcome prediction in OGT.
REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42022366864.

DOI: 10.1177/14653125231203743
PMID: 37772513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


15. Int J Nurs Stud. 2023 Jul;143:104494. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2023.104494. Epub 
2023 Apr 5.

Feasibility and effectiveness of artificial intelligence-driven conversational 
agents in healthcare interventions: A systematic review of randomized controlled 
trials.

Li Y(1), Liang S(2), Zhu B(3), Liu X(4), Li J(5), Chen D(2), Qin J(2), 
Bressington D(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong. 
Electronic address: yan-nursing.li@polyu.edu.hk.
(2)School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong.
(3)School of Nursing, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)The Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Zhuhai, China.
(5)School of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Hong 
Kong.
(6)College of Nursing and Midwifery, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: A virtual conversational agent is a program that typically utilizes 
artificial intelligence technology to mimic human interactions. Many robust and 
high-quality clinical trials have been conducted to test the effectiveness of 
conversational agent-based interventions. However, there is a lack of systematic 
reviews of randomized controlled trials that evaluate the effects of artificial 
intelligence-driven conversational agents in healthcare interventions.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the feasibility and effectiveness of conversational 
agent-based interventions evaluated by randomized controlled trials in the 
healthcare context, as well as to evaluate the information quality of artificial 
intelligence-driven conversational agents.
DESIGN: A systematic review.
DATA SOURCE: A systematic search of relevant literature published in English in 
Scopus, Pubmed, Embase, PsycINFO, Cochrane Library, Information Science & 
Technology, and Web of Science, was performed. Only randomized controlled trials 
from the inception of the databases until May 2022 were included.
REVIEW METHODS: Two reviewers independently selected the articles according to 
the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Study findings were narratively 
synthesized and summarized. The studies' risk of bias was evaluated using the 
Risk of Bias 2.0 tool. The Silberg Scale was used to evaluate the quality of the 
conversational agent system utilized in each reviewed study.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies were included in the data synthesis. The recruitment 
rates ranged from 34% to 100% (mean = 84%), and completion rates ranged from 40% 
to 100% (mean = 83%). A moderate to high level of intervention acceptability was 
reported. The intervention approaches included health counseling and education 
(n = 8), cognitive-behavioral interventions (n = 7), storytelling (n = 1), 
acceptance and commitment therapy (n = 1), and coping skills training (n = 1). 
Findings indicated inconsistent effects on improving participants' physical 
activity and function, healthy lifestyle modifications, knowledge of the 
diseases, and mental health and psychosocial outcomes. The overall risk of bias 
varied from low risk (n = 6) to high risk (n = 7) across the studies. The mean 
Silberg score of included studies was 5.4/9, with a standard deviation of 1.6.
CONCLUSION: Our review findings indicated that conversational agent-based 
interventions were feasible, acceptable, and had positive effects on physical 
functioning, healthy lifestyle, mental health and psychosocial outcomes. 
Conversational agents can provide low-threshold access to healthcare services. 
They can serve as remote medical assistants to support patients' recovery or 
health promotion needs before or after medical treatments. The conversational 
agent-based interventions can also play adjunctive roles and be integrated into 
current healthcare systems, which could improve the comprehensiveness of 
services and make more efficient use of physicians' and nurses' time.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2023.104494
PMID: 37146391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


16. Lancet Digit Health. 2025 Nov;7(11):100924. doi: 10.1016/j.landig.2025.100924. 
Epub 2025 Dec 1.

Synthetic data, synthetic trust: navigating data challenges in the digital 
revolution.

Koul A(1), Duran D(2), Hernandez-Boussard T(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities (NIMHD), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. Electronic 
address: boussard@stanford.edu.

In the evolving landscape of artificial intelligence (AI), the assumption that 
more data lead to better models has driven unchecked reliance on synthetic data 
to augment training datasets. Although synthetic data address crucial shortages 
of real-world training data, their overuse might propagate biases, accelerate 
model degradation, and compromise generalisability across populations. A 
concerning consequence of the rapid adoption of synthetic data in medical AI is 
the emergence of synthetic trust-an unwarranted confidence in models trained on 
artificially generated datasets that fail to preserve clinical validity or 
demographic realities. In this Viewpoint, we advocate for caution in using 
synthetic data to train clinical algorithms. We propose actionable safeguards 
for synthetic medical AI, including standards for training data, fragility 
testing during development, and deployment disclosures for synthetic origins to 
ensure end-to-end accountability. These safeguards uphold data integrity and 
fairness in clinical applications using synthetic data, offering new standards 
for responsible and equitable use of synthetic data in health care.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.landig.2025.100924
PMCID: PMC12778113
PMID: 41330822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests TH-B is a consultant 
for Grai-Matter and Paul Hartmann and holds stock options at Verantos. These 
affiliations did not influence this work. AK and DD declare no competing 
interests.


17. J Clin Periodontol. 2025 Aug;52 Suppl 29:246-291. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.14168. Epub 
2025 Jun 25.

Emerging Technologies and Algorithms for Periodontal Screening and Risk of 
Disease Progression in Non-Dental Settings: A Scoping Review.

Montero E(1)(2), Sánchez N(1)(2), Sanz-Sánchez I(1)(2), López-Durán M(1)(2), de 
Albornoz AC(1)(2), Dietrich T(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Graduate Periodontology, University Complutense of Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)ETEP (Etiology and Therapy of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases) Research 
Group, University Complutense of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(3)University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

AIM: To evaluate different tools to screen for periodontal diseases and/or 
evaluate the risk for disease progression in non-dental clinical settings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) 
guideline was followed. A systematic search was conducted on three databases. In 
order to provide a comprehensive picture of periodontal diseases (Population) 
screening and risk assessment tools (Concept) in non-dental settings (Context), 
the available information was identified and presented in terms of the sources 
of data/domains assessed and, eventually, how the tools/algorithms were 
validated. The risk of bias was assessed using the QUADAS-2 tool.
RESULTS: A total of 5313 articles were identified for abstract screening. 
Finally, 102 were included for data synthesis. The included studies were 
classified into domains/clusters. Only two studies focused on risk assessment 
for disease progression. Algorithms designed to screen for gingivitis tended to 
present low sensitivity values, while the screening performance improved for 
periodontitis, particularly for severe periodontitis. Validated self-reported 
questionnaires plus socio-demographic determinants (e.g., age), certain 
biomarkers in saliva (e.g., activated matrix metalloproteinase-8, aMMP-8) and 
artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms based on orthopantomographs (OPGs) 
present the best screening capacity for periodontitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Screening for periodontitis in non-dental settings is feasible. 
Validated self-reported questionnaires remain the gold standard for screening 
severe periodontitis in non-dental settings, although AI algorithms based on 
biomarkers in saliva, or derived from OPGs, have shown promising results.

© 2025 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.14168
PMID: 40557558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int Dent J. 2025 Aug;75(4):100858. doi: 10.1016/j.identj.2025.100858. Epub 2025 
Jun 26.

AI-Powered Problem- and Case-based Learning in Medical and Dental Education: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Wei H(1), Dai Y(2), Yuan K(2), Li KY(3), Hung KF(4), Hu EM(2), Lee AHC(2), Chang 
JWW(2), Zhang C(2), Li X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stomatology, Liuzhou Workers' Hospital, Liuzhou Guangxi, P. R. 
China; Division of Restorative Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Division of Restorative Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)Clinical Research Centre, Faculty of Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Division of Applied Oral Sciences and Community Dental Care, Faculty of 
Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(5)Division of Restorative Dental Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. Electronic address: xli0712@hku.hk.

INTRODUCTION AND AIMS: Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) technology have 
generated a revolution in medical and dental education, which may offer 
promising solutions to tackle the challenges of traditional problem-based 
learning (PBL) and case-based learning (CBL). The objective of this study was to 
assess the available evidence concerning AI-powered PBL/CBL on students' 
knowledge acquisition, clinical reasoning capability and satisfaction.
METHODS: An electronic search was carried out on PubMed, MEDLINE, the Cochrane 
Central Register of Controlled Trials and Web of Science. Clinical trials 
published in English with full text available, which implemented AI technologies 
in PBL/CBL in the medical/dental field and evaluated knowledge acquisition, 
clinical reasoning and/or satisfaction were included. The quality assessment was 
conducted using RoB 2 by two calibrated assessors. Data synthesis and 
meta-analysis were performed, the standardised mean difference (SMD) or 
standardised mean (SM) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated, and 
heterogeneity was quantified.
RESULTS: Six randomized controlled trials were included, with an overall risk of 
bias judged to have 'some concerns'. For knowledge acquisition, 4 studies were 
included in the meta-analysis. A low heterogeneity (I² = 20%) was detected and a 
fixed-effect model was utilised. Compared with the control group, the AI 
intervention significantly improved knowledge acquisition by 46% (95% Cls 
[0.18-0.73], P = .001). For clinical reasoning capability, due to methodological 
and measurement heterogeneity among studies, statistical analysis was not 
feasible. Three studies were selected for the meta-analysis of students' 
satisfaction. Heterogeneity was moderate (I² = 32%), and a generic inverse 
variance method was selected. The pooled SM score was 0.7 (95% Cls [0.47-0.92]), 
and the overall effect was statistically significant (P < .00001).
CONCLUSION: Despite limitations such as the limited number of included studies 
and the overall risk of bias concerns, AI-powered PBL/CBL has the potential to 
enhance students' knowledge acquisition and learner satisfaction compared to 
traditional learning approaches.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Not applicable.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.identj.2025.100858
PMCID: PMC12268559
PMID: 40578029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None disclosed.


19. Invest Radiol. 2024 Nov 1;59(11):767-773. doi: 10.1097/RLI.0000000000001086. 
Epub 2024 May 1.

Deep Learning Synthesis of White-Blood From Dark-Blood Late Gadolinium 
Enhancement Cardiac Magnetic Resonance.

Jaspers TJM(1), Martens B, Crawley R, Jada L, Amirrajab S, Breeuwer M, 
Holtackers RJ, Chiribiri A, Scannell CM.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of 
Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands (T.J.M.J., S.A., M.B., C.M.S.); School of 
Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, London, 
United Kingdom (T.J.M.J., R.C., L.J., R.J.H., A.C., C.M.S.); Department of 
Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the 
Netherlands (T.J.M.J.); Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht 
University, Maastricht, the Netherlands (B.M., R.J.H.); and Department of 
Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands (B.M., R.J.H.).

OBJECTIVES: Dark-blood late gadolinium enhancement (DB-LGE) cardiac magnetic 
resonance has been proposed as an alternative to standard white-blood LGE 
(WB-LGE) imaging protocols to enhance scar-to-blood contrast without 
compromising scar-to-myocardium contrast. In practice, both DB and WB contrasts 
may have clinical utility, but acquiring both has the drawback of additional 
acquisition time. The aim of this study was to develop and evaluate a deep 
learning method to generate synthetic WB-LGE images from DB-LGE, allowing the 
assessment of both contrasts without additional scan time.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DB-LGE and WB-LGE data from 215 patients were used to 
train 2 types of unpaired image-to-image translation deep learning models, 
cycle-consistent generative adversarial network (CycleGAN) and contrastive 
unpaired translation, with 5 different loss function hyperparameter settings 
each. Initially, the best hyperparameter setting was determined for each model 
type based on the Fréchet inception distance and the visual assessment of expert 
readers. Then, the CycleGAN and contrastive unpaired translation models with the 
optimal hyperparameters were directly compared. Finally, with the best model 
chosen, the quantification of scar based on the synthetic WB-LGE images was 
compared with the truly acquired WB-LGE.
RESULTS: The CycleGAN architecture for unpaired image-to-image translation was 
found to provide the most realistic synthetic WB-LGE images from DB-LGE images. 
The results showed that it was difficult for visual readers to distinguish if an 
image was true or synthetic (55% correctly classified). In addition, scar burden 
quantification with the synthetic data was highly correlated with the analysis 
of the truly acquired images. Bland-Altman analysis found a mean bias in 
percentage scar burden between the quantification of the real WB and synthetic 
white-blood images of 0.44% with limits of agreement from -10.85% to 11.74%. The 
mean image quality of the real WB images (3.53/5) was scored higher than the 
synthetic white-blood images (3.03), P = 0.009.
CONCLUSIONS: This study proposed a CycleGAN model to generate synthetic WB-LGE 
from DB-LGE images to allow assessment of both image contrasts without 
additional scan time. This work represents a clinically focused assessment of 
synthetic medical images generated by artificial intelligence, a topic with 
significant potential for a multitude of applications. However, further 
evaluation is warranted before clinical adoption.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RLI.0000000000001086
PMID: 38687025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest and sources of funding: 
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Wellcome Trust (WT 
222678/Z/16/Z) and the Wellcome/EPSRC Centre for Medical Engineering (WT 
203148/Z/16/Z).


20. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2023 Jul 3;64(10):29. doi: 10.1167/iovs.64.10.29.

Clinical Applications of Machine Learning in the Management of Intraocular 
Cancers: A Narrative Review.

Chandrabhatla AS(1), Horgan TM(1), Cotton CC(1), Ambati NK(1), Shildkrot YE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States.

PURPOSE: There is great promise in use of machine learning (ML) for the 
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of various medical conditions in 
ophthalmology and beyond. Applications of ML for ocular neoplasms are in early 
development and this review synthesizes the current state of ML in ocular 
oncology.
METHODS: We queried PubMed and Web of Science and evaluated 804 publications, 
excluding nonhuman studies. Metrics on ML algorithm performance were collected 
and the Prediction model study Risk Of Bias ASsessment Tool was used to evaluate 
bias. We report the results of 63 unique studies.
RESULTS: Research regarding ML applications to intraocular cancers has leveraged 
multiple algorithms and data sources. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were 
one of the most commonly used ML algorithms and most work has focused on uveal 
melanoma and retinoblastoma. The majority of ML models discussed here were 
developed for diagnosis and prognosis. Algorithms for diagnosis primarily 
leveraged imaging (e.g., optical coherence tomography) as inputs, whereas those 
for prognosis leveraged combinations of gene expression, tumor characteristics, 
and patient demographics.
CONCLUSIONS: ML has the potential to improve the management of intraocular 
cancers. Published ML models perform well, but were occasionally limited by 
small sample sizes owing to the low prevalence of intraocular cancers. This 
could be overcome with synthetic data enhancement and low-shot ML techniques. 
CNNs can be integrated into existing diagnostic workflows, while non-neural 
networks perform well in determining prognosis.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.64.10.29
PMCID: PMC10365137
PMID: 37477930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: A.S. Chandrabhatla, None; T.M. 
Horgan, None; C.C. Cotton, None; N.K. Ambati, None; Y.E. Shildkrot, Castle 
Biosciences (C), Genentech/Roche (E)


21. PLoS One. 2024 Apr 30;19(4):e0302169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0302169. 
eCollection 2024.

Deep multiple instance learning versus conventional deep single instance 
learning for interpretable oral cancer detection.

Koriakina N(1), Sladoje N(1), Bašić V(2)(3), Lindblad J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Image Analysis, Department of Information Technology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Natural Science and Biomedicine, School of Health and Welfare, 
Jönköping University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(3)Clinical Research Center Dalarna, Uppsala University, Falun, Sweden.

The current medical standard for setting an oral cancer (OC) diagnosis is 
histological examination of a tissue sample taken from the oral cavity. This 
process is time-consuming and more invasive than an alternative approach of 
acquiring a brush sample followed by cytological analysis. Using a microscope, 
skilled cytotechnologists are able to detect changes due to malignancy; however, 
introducing this approach into clinical routine is associated with challenges 
such as a lack of resources and experts. To design a trustworthy OC detection 
system that can assist cytotechnologists, we are interested in deep learning 
based methods that can reliably detect cancer, given only per-patient labels 
(thereby minimizing annotation bias), and also provide information regarding 
which cells are most relevant for the diagnosis (thereby enabling supervision 
and understanding). In this study, we perform a comparison of two approaches 
suitable for OC detection and interpretation: (i) conventional single instance 
learning (SIL) approach and (ii) a modern multiple instance learning (MIL) 
method. To facilitate systematic evaluation of the considered approaches, we, in 
addition to a real OC dataset with patient-level ground truth annotations, also 
introduce a synthetic dataset-PAP-QMNIST. This dataset shares several properties 
of OC data, such as image size and large and varied number of instances per bag, 
and may therefore act as a proxy model of a real OC dataset, while, in contrast 
to OC data, it offers reliable per-instance ground truth, as defined by design. 
PAP-QMNIST has the additional advantage of being visually interpretable for 
non-experts, which simplifies analysis of the behavior of methods. For both OC 
and PAP-QMNIST data, we evaluate performance of the methods utilizing three 
different neural network architectures. Our study indicates, somewhat 
surprisingly, that on both synthetic and real data, the performance of the SIL 
approach is better or equal to the performance of the MIL approach. Visual 
examination by cytotechnologist indicates that the methods manage to identify 
cells which deviate from normality, including malignant cells as well as those 
suspicious for dysplasia. We share the code as open source.

Copyright: © 2024 Koriakina et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0302169
PMCID: PMC11060593
PMID: 38687694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


22. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2024 Nov 1;31(11):2613-2621. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocae165.

Towards objective and systematic evaluation of bias in artificial intelligence 
for medical imaging.

Stanley EAM(1)(2)(3)(4), Souza R(1)(2)(3)(4), Winder AJ(2)(3), Gulve V(2), 
Amador K(1)(2)(3)(4), Wilms M(3)(4)(5)(6), Forkert ND(2)(3)(4)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Engineering Graduate Program, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, 
Canada.
(3)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, 
Canada.
(4)Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4N1, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, T2N 4N1, Canada.
(7)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
T2N 4N1, Canada.
(8)Department of Electrical and Software Engineering, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Artificial intelligence (AI) models trained using medical images for 
clinical tasks often exhibit bias in the form of subgroup performance 
disparities. However, since not all sources of bias in real-world medical 
imaging data are easily identifiable, it is challenging to comprehensively 
assess their impacts. In this article, we introduce an analysis framework for 
systematically and objectively investigating the impact of biases in medical 
images on AI models.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our framework utilizes synthetic neuroimages with known 
disease effects and sources of bias. We evaluated the impact of bias effects and 
the efficacy of 3 bias mitigation strategies in counterfactual data scenarios on 
a convolutional neural network (CNN) classifier.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed that training a CNN model on the datasets 
containing bias effects resulted in expected subgroup performance disparities. 
Moreover, reweighing was the most successful bias mitigation strategy for this 
setup. Finally, we demonstrated that explainable AI methods can aid in 
investigating the manifestation of bias in the model using this framework.
DISCUSSION: The value of this framework is showcased in our findings on the 
impact of bias scenarios and efficacy of bias mitigation in a deep learning 
model pipeline. This systematic analysis can be easily expanded to conduct 
further controlled in silico trials in other investigations of bias in medical 
imaging AI.
CONCLUSION: Our novel methodology for objectively studying bias in medical 
imaging AI can help support the development of clinical decision-support tools 
that are robust and responsible.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocae165
PMCID: PMC11491635
PMID: 38942737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


23. Clin Chim Acta. 2026 Apr 1;585:120878. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2026.120878. Epub 2026 
Jan 30.

Synthetic data in the clinical laboratory: methods, applications, and future 
prospects.

Pillay TS(1), van Deventer BS(2), Gwiliza S(2), Subramoney EL(2), van Niekerk 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Pretoria and National Health Laboratory Service Tshwane Academic Division, 
Pretoria, South Africa; Division of Chemical Pathology, University of Cape Town, 
South Africa. Electronic address: tahir.pillay@up.ac.za.
(2)Department of Chemical Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Pretoria and National Health Laboratory Service Tshwane Academic Division, 
Pretoria, South Africa.

Clinical laboratories face stringent privacy constraints, limited datasets for 
rare conditions, and rising demands to validate AI algorithms and workflows 
safely. Synthetic data-artificially generated data that preserve the statistical 
characteristics of real clinical data without exposing patient identities-has 
emerged as a powerful tool to address these challenges. This review provides a 
comprehensive overview of synthetic data in the context of laboratory medicine. 
We begin by defining synthetic data and describing the main generation methods, 
from rule-based simulations to modern generative models (including generative 
adversarial networks, variational autoencoders, and diffusion models) with 
examples of their use in healthcare. We then delve into key applications in the 
clinical laboratory: quality control and method validation, education and 
training, machine learning development, test utilization and workflow 
simulation, and external quality assessment. Advantages of synthetic data-such 
as enhanced privacy, scalability, flexibility in simulating rare events, and 
cost-effectiveness-are discussed with illustrative case studies. We also examine 
challenges and limitations, including concerns about data fidelity, bias 
amplification, risks of model overfitting or re-identification attacks, and the 
cautious stance of regulators that still require real patient data for 
approvals. Finally, we outline future directions for synthetic data in 
laboratory medicine, from hybrid real-synthetic datasets and privacy-enhancing 
techniques to evolving regulatory frameworks and the potential to democratize 
data access globally. While synthetic data cannot entirely replace real clinical 
data-especially for regulatory validation-it can significantly augment what 
laboratories can design, test, and achieve, provided it is used with careful 
validation and ethical safeguards.

Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2026.120878
PMID: 41621772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


24. Annu Rev Biomed Data Sci. 2025 Aug;8(1):21-49. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-biodatasci-103123-094844. Epub 2025 Jan 14.

Conditional Generative Models for Synthetic Tabular Data: Applications for 
Precision Medicine and Diverse Representations.

Liu K(1), Altman RB(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
USA; email: karaliu@stanford.edu.
(2)Departments of Bioengineering and Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California, USA.

Tabular medical datasets, like electronic health records (EHRs), biobanks, and 
structured clinical trial data, are rich sources of information with the 
potential to advance precision medicine and optimize patient care. However, 
real-world medical datasets have limited patient diversity and cannot simulate 
hypothetical outcomes, both of which are necessary for equitable and effective 
medical research. Fueled by recent advancements in machine learning, generative 
models offer a promising solution to these data limitations by generating 
enhanced synthetic data. This review highlights the potential of conditional 
generative models (CGMs) to create patient-specific synthetic data for a variety 
of precision medicine applications. We survey CGM approaches that tackle two 
medical applications: correcting for data representation biases and simulating 
digital health twins. We additionally explore how the surveyed methods handle 
modeling tabular medical data and briefly discuss evaluation criteria. Finally, 
we summarize the technical, medical, and ethical challenges that must be 
addressed before CGMs can be effectively and safely deployed in the medical 
field.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-biodatasci-103123-094844
PMID: 39809456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2022 Jun 3;19(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s12984-022-01032-4.

Machine learning methods for functional recovery prediction and prognosis in 
post-stroke rehabilitation: a systematic review.

Campagnini S(1)(2), Arienti C(1), Patrini M(1), Liuzzi P(1)(2), Mannini A(3), 
Carrozza MC(2).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi Onlus, Via di Scandicci 269, 50143, 
Firenze, Italy.
(2)Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Viale Rinaldo Piaggio 34, 56025, Pontedera, 
Italy.
(3)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi Onlus, Via di Scandicci 269, 50143, 
Firenze, Italy. amannini@dongnocchi.it.

BACKGROUND: Rehabilitation medicine is facing a new development phase thanks to 
a recent wave of rigorous clinical trials aimed at improving the scientific 
evidence of protocols. This phenomenon, combined with new trends in personalised 
medical therapies, is expected to change clinical practice dramatically. The 
emerging field of Rehabilomics is only possible if methodologies are based on 
biomedical data collection and analysis. In this framework, the objective of 
this work is to develop a systematic review of machine learning algorithms as 
solutions to predict motor functional recovery of post-stroke patients after 
treatment.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search of five electronic databases using 
the Patient, Intervention, Comparison and Outcome (PICO) format. We extracted 
health conditions, population characteristics, outcome assessed, the method for 
feature extraction and selection, the algorithm used, and the validation 
approach. The methodological quality of included studies was assessed using the 
prediction model risk of bias assessment tool (PROBAST). A qualitative 
description of the characteristics of the included studies as well as a 
narrative data synthesis was performed.
RESULTS: A total of 19 primary studies were included. The predictors most 
frequently used belonged to the areas of demographic characteristics and stroke 
assessment through clinical examination. Regarding the methods, linear and 
logistic regressions were the most frequently used and cross-validation was the 
preferred validation approach.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified several methodological limitations: small sample 
sizes, a limited number of external validation approaches, and high 
heterogeneity among input and output variables. Although these elements 
prevented a quantitative comparison across models, we defined the most 
frequently used models given a specific outcome, providing useful indications 
for the application of more complex machine learning algorithms in 
rehabilitation medicine.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12984-022-01032-4
PMCID: PMC9166382
PMID: 35659246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


26. Biom J. 2022 Jun;64(5):863-882. doi: 10.1002/bimj.202000393. Epub 2022 Mar 10.

Missing data imputation in clinical trials using recurrent neural network 
facilitated by clustering and oversampling.

Haliduola HN(1)(2), Bretz F(3)(4), Mansmann U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry and Epidemiology 
(IBE), LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Alvotech Germany GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(3)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Section for Medical Statistics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.

In clinical practice, the composition of missing data may be complex, for 
example, a mixture of missing at random (MAR) and missing not at random (MNAR) 
assumptions. Many methods under the assumption of MAR are available. Under the 
assumption of MNAR, likelihood-based methods require specification of the joint 
distribution of the data, and the missingness mechanism has been introduced as 
sensitivity analysis. These classic models heavily rely on the underlying 
assumption, and, in many realistic scenarios, they can produce unreliable 
estimates. In this paper, we develop a machine learning based missing data 
prediction framework with the aim of handling more realistic missing data 
scenarios. We use an imbalanced learning technique (i.e., oversampling of 
minority class) to handle the MNAR data. To implement oversampling in 
longitudinal continuous variable, we first perform clustering via k -mean 
trajectories. And use the recurrent neural network (RNN) to model the 
longitudinal data. Further, we apply bootstrap aggregating to improve the 
accuracy of prediction and also to consider the uncertainty of a single 
prediction. We evaluate the proposed method using simulated data. The prediction 
result is evaluated at the individual patient level and the overall population 
level. We demonstrate the powerful predictive capability of RNN for longitudinal 
data and its flexibility for nonlinear modeling. Overall, the proposed method 
provides an accurate individual prediction for both MAR and MNAR data and reduce 
the bias of missing data in treatment effect estimation when compared to 
standard methods and classic models. Finally, we implement the proposed method 
in a real dataset from an antidepressant clinical trial. In summary, this paper 
offers an opportunity to encourage the integration of machine learning 
strategies for handling of missing data in the analysis of randomized 
clinical trials.

© 2022 The Authors. Biometrical Journal published by Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1002/bimj.202000393
PMID: 35266565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2025 Sep 3;331:25-34. doi: 10.3233/SHTI251376.

Towards Fairness in Synthetic Healthcare Data: A Framework for the Evaluation of 
Synthetization Algorithms.

Warnecke Y(1), Kuhn M(2), Diederichs F(3), Brix TJ(1), Clever L(3), Bergmann 
R(2)(4), Heider D(1), Storck M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(2)German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Trier, Germany.
(3)Department of Information Systems, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(4)Business Information Systems II, Trier University, Trier, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Synthetic data generation is a rapidly evolving field, with 
significant potential for improving data privacy. However, evaluating the 
performance of synthetic data generation methods, especially the tradeoff 
between fairness and utility of the generated data, remains a challenge.
METHODOLOGY: In this work, we present our comprehensive framework, which 
evaluates fair synthetic data generation methods, benchmarking them against 
state-of-the-art synthesizers.
RESULTS: The proposed framework consists of selection, evaluation, and 
application components that assess fairness, utility, and resemblance in 
real-world scenarios. The framework was applied to state-of-the-art data 
synthesizers, including TabFairGAN, DECAF, TVAE, and CTGAN, using a publicly 
available medical dataset.
DISCUSSION: The results reveal the strengths and limitations of each 
synthesizer, including their bias mitigation strategies and trade-offs between 
fairness and utility, thereby showing the framework's effectiveness. The 
proposed framework offers valuable insights into the fairness-utility tradeoff 
and evaluation of synthetic data generation methods, with far-reaching 
implications for various applications in the medical domain and beyond.
CONCLUSION: The findings demonstrate the importance of considering fairness in 
synthetic data generation and the need for fairness focused evaluation 
frameworks, highlighting the significance of continued research in this area.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI251376
PMID: 40899524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biomed Inform. 2023 Aug;144:104436. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2023.104436. Epub 2023 
Jul 13.

Generating synthetic clinical data that capture class imbalanced distributions 
with generative adversarial networks: Example using antiretroviral therapy for 
HIV.

Kuo NI(1), Garcia F(2), Sönnerborg A(3), Böhm M(4), Kaiser R(4), Zazzi M(5); 
EuResist Network study group; Polizzotto M(6), Jorm L(7), Barbieri S(7).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Big Data Research in Health, the University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: n.kuo@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Ibs.Granada, Spain; Hospital Universitario San 
Cecilio, Spain; CIBER de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Spain.
(3)Hospital Karolinska Institutet, Sweden.
(4)Uniklinik Köln, Universität zu Köln, Germany.
(5)Università degli Studi di Siena, Italy.
(6)Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.
(7)Centre for Big Data Research in Health, the University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical data's confidential nature often limits the development of 
machine learning models in healthcare. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) 
can synthesise realistic datasets, but suffer from mode collapse, resulting in 
low diversity and bias towards majority demographics and common clinical 
practices. This work proposes an extension to the classic GAN framework that 
includes a variational autoencoder (VAE) and an external memory mechanism to 
overcome these limitations and generate synthetic data accurately describing 
imbalanced class distributions commonly found in clinical variables.
METHODS: The proposed method generated a synthetic dataset related to 
antiretroviral therapy for human immunodeficiency virus (ART for HIV). We 
evaluated it based on five metrics: (1) accurately representing imbalanced class 
distribution; (2) the realism of the individual variables; (3) the realism among 
variables; (4) patient disclosure risk; and (5) the utility of the generated 
dataset for developing downstream machine learning models.
RESULTS: The proposed method overcomes the issue of mode collapse and generates 
a synthetic dataset that accurately describes imbalanced class distributions 
commonly found in clinical variables. The generated data has a patient 
disclosure risk of 0.095%, lower than the 9% threshold stated by Health Canada 
and the European Medicines Agency, making it suitable for distribution to the 
research community with high security. The generated data also has high utility, 
indicating the potential of the proposed method to enable the development of 
downstream machine learning algorithms for healthcare applications using 
synthetic data.
CONCLUSION: Our proposed extension to the classic GAN framework, which includes 
a VAE and an external memory mechanism, represents a promising approach towards 
generating synthetic data that accurately describe imbalanced class 
distributions commonly found in clinical variables. This method overcomes the 
limitations of GANs and creates more realistic datasets with higher patient 
cohort diversity, facilitating the development of downstream machine learning 
algorithms for healthcare applications.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2023.104436
PMID: 37451495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Nicholas I-Hsien Kuo reports 
financial support was provided by Wellcome Trust Open Research Fund. Sebastiano 
Barbieri reports financial support was provided by Wellcome Trust Open Research 
Fund.


29. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2023 Oct;44(10):1126-1134. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A8000.

Systematic Literature Review of Machine Learning Algorithms Using Pretherapy 
Radiologic Imaging for Glioma Molecular Subtype Prediction.

Lost J(1)(2), Verma T(1), Jekel L(1), von Reppert M(1), Tillmanns N(1), Merkaj 
S(1), Petersen GC(1), Bahar R(1), Gordem A(1), Haider MA(1), Subramanian H(1), 
Brim W(1), Ikuta I(3), Omuro A(4), Conte GM(5), Marquez-Nostra BV(1), Avesta 
A(1), Bousabarah K(6), Nabavizadeh A(7), Kazerooni AF(8)(9)(10), Aneja S(11), 
Bakas S(12)(13)(14), Lin M(1)(6), Sabel M(2), Aboian M(15).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging (J.L., T.V., L.J., 
M.v.R., N.T., S.M., G.C.P., R.B., A.G., M.A.H., H.S., W.B., B.V.M.-N., A.A., 
M.L., M.A.), Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery (J.L., M.S.), Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Duesseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Radiology (I.I.), Mayo Clinic Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona.
(4)Department of Neurology and Yale Cancer Center (A.O.), Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(5)Department of Radiology (G.M.C.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minesotta.
(6)Visage Imaging Inc (K.B., M.L.), San Diego, California.
(7)Department of Radiology (A.N.), Perelman School of Medicine, Hospital of 
University of Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery (A.F.K.), Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(9)Division of Neurosurgery (A.F.K.), Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(10)Center for Data-Driven Discovery (A.F.K.), Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(11)Department of Therapeutic Radiology (S.A), Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut.
(12)Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics (S.B.), Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(13)Richards Medical Research Laboratories (S.B.), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(14)Department of Radiology (S.B.), Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(15)From the Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging (J.L., T.V., L.J., 
M.v.R., N.T., S.M., G.C.P., R.B., A.G., M.A.H., H.S., W.B., B.V.M.-N., A.A., 
M.L., M.A.), Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
mariam.aboian@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND: The molecular profile of gliomas is a prognostic indicator for 
survival, driving clinical decision-making for treatment. Pathology-based 
molecular diagnosis is challenging because of the invasiveness of the procedure, 
exclusion from neoadjuvant therapy options, and the heterogeneous nature of the 
tumor.
PURPOSE: We performed a systematic review of algorithms that predict molecular 
subtypes of gliomas from MR Imaging.
DATA SOURCES: Data sources were Ovid Embase, Ovid MEDLINE, Cochrane Central 
Register of Controlled Trials, Web of Science.
STUDY SELECTION: Per the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, 12,318 abstracts were screened and 1323 
underwent full-text review, with 85 articles meeting the inclusion criteria.
DATA ANALYSIS: We compared prediction results from different machine learning 
approaches for predicting molecular subtypes of gliomas. Bias analysis was 
conducted for each study, following the Prediction model Risk Of Bias Assessment 
Tool (PROBAST) guidelines.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Isocitrate dehydrogenase mutation status was reported with an 
area under the curve and accuracy of 0.88 and 85% in internal validation and 
0.86 and 87% in limited external validation data sets, respectively. For the 
prediction of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase promoter methylation, the 
area under the curve and accuracy in internal validation data sets were 0.79 and 
77%, and in limited external validation, 0.89 and 83%, respectively. PROBAST 
scoring demonstrated high bias in all articles.
LIMITATIONS: The low number of external validation and studies with incomplete 
data resulted in unequal data analysis. Comparing the best prediction pipelines 
of each study may introduce bias.
CONCLUSIONS: While the high area under the curve and accuracy for the prediction 
of molecular subtypes of gliomas are reported in internal and external 
validation data sets, limited use of external validation and the increased risk 
of bias in all articles may present obstacles for clinical translation of these 
techniques.

© 2023 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A8000
PMCID: PMC10549943
PMID: 37770204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Crit Care Med. 2024 Jan 1;52(1):125-135. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006050. Epub 
2023 Sep 12.

National ICU Registries as Enablers of Clinical Research and Quality 
Improvement.

Salluh JIF(1)(2), Quintairos A(1)(3), Dongelmans DA(4)(5), Aryal D(6), Bagshaw 
S(7)(8), Beane A(9)(10), Burghi G(11), López MDPA(12)(13), Finazzi S(14)(15), 
Guidet B(16), Hashimoto S(17), Ichihara N(18), Litton E(19)(20), Lone 
NI(21)(22), Pari V(23), Sendagire C(1)(24), Vijayaraghavan BKT(25)(26), Haniffa 
R(9)(27)(28), Pisani L(9), Pilcher D(29)(30)(31); Linking of Global Intensive 
Care (LOGIC) and Japanese Intensive care PAtient Database (JIPAD) Working Group.

Author information:
(1)D'Or Institute for Research and Education, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Post-Graduation Program, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Critical and Intensive Care Medicine, Academic Hospital 
Fundación Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, Colombia.
(4)Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Department of Intensive Care 
Medicine, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)National Intensive Care Evaluation (NICE) Foundation, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(6)National Coordinator, Nepal Intensive Care Research Foundation, Kathmandu, 
Nepal.
(7)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry (Ling, Bagshaw), 
University of Alberta and Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(8)Division of Internal Medicine (Villeneuve), Department of Critical Care 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry and School of Public Health, 
University of Alberta and Grey Nuns Hospitals, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(9)Critical Care, Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(10)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(11)Hospital Maciel, Montevideo, Uruguay.
(12)Argentine Society of Intensive Care (SATI). SATI-Q Program, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(13)Intermediate Care Unit, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutierrez, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
(14)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Ranica, Italy.
(15)Associazione GiViTI, c/o Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(16)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre Louis d'Epidémiologie et de 
Santé Publique, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, service de réanimation, Paris, 
France.
(17)Division of Intensive Care, Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care 
Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(18)Department of Healthcare Quality Assessment, Graduate School of Medicine, 
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(19)Fiona Stanley Hospital, Perth, WA.
(20)The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA.
(21)Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(22)Scottish Intensive Care Society Audit Group, United Kingdom.
(23)Chennai Critical Care Consultants, Pvt Ltd, Chennai, India.
(24)Anesthesia and Critical Care, Makerere University College of Health 
Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(25)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Apollo Main Hospital, Chennai, India.
(26)The George Institute for Global Health, New Delhi, India.
(27)Crit Care Asia, Network for Improving Critical Care Systems and Training, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(28)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(29)University College Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(30)Department of Intensive Care, Alfred Health, Prahran, VIC, Australia.
(31)The Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society (ANZICS) Centre for 
Outcome and Resource Evaluation, Camberwell, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Clinical quality registries (CQRs) have been implemented worldwide 
by several medical specialties aiming to generate a better characterization of 
epidemiology, treatments, and outcomes of patients. National ICU registries were 
created almost 3 decades ago to improve the understanding of case-mix, resource 
use, and outcomes of critically ill patients. This narrative review describes 
the challenges, proposed solutions, and evidence generated by National ICU 
registries as facilitators for research and quality improvement.
DATA SOURCES: English language articles were identified in PubMed using phrases 
related to ICU registries, CQRs, outcomes, and case-mix.
STUDY SELECTION: Original research, review articles, letters, and commentaries, 
were considered.
DATA EXTRACTION: Data from relevant literature were identified, reviewed, and 
integrated into a concise narrative review.
DATA SYNTHESIS: CQRs have been implemented worldwide by several medical 
specialties aiming to generate a better characterization of epidemiology, 
treatments, and outcomes of patients. National ICU registries were created 
almost 3 decades ago to improve the understanding of case-mix, resource use, and 
outcomes of critically ill patients. The initial experience in European 
countries and in Oceania ensured that through locally generated data, ICUs could 
assess their performances by using risk-adjusted measures and compare their 
results through fair and validated benchmarking metrics with other ICUs 
contributing to the CQR. The accomplishment of these initiatives, coupled with 
the increasing adoption of information technology, resulted in a broad 
geographic expansion of CQRs as well as their use in quality improvement 
studies, clinical trials as well as international comparisons, and benchmarking 
for ICUs.
CONCLUSIONS: ICU registries have provided increased knowledge of case-mix and 
outcomes of ICU patients based on real-world data and contributed to improve 
care delivery through quality improvement initiatives and trials. Recent 
increases in adoption of new technologies (i.e., cloud-based structures, 
artificial intelligence, machine learning) will ensure a broader and better use 
of data for epidemiology, healthcare policies, quality improvement, and clinical 
trials.

Copyright © 2023 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer 
Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006050
PMID: 37698452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Beane received support for article research 
from Wellcome Trust/Charity Open Access Fund (COAF). Drs. Pilcher and Litton are 
members of the Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society Centre for 
Outcome and Resources Evaluation management committee. Drs Salluh is co-founder 
and shareholder of Epimed Solutions, a healthcare cloud-based analytics company. 
He is also supported, in part, by individual research grants from the National 
Council for Scientific and Technological Development and Research Support 
Foundation of the State of Rio de Janeiro. Dr. Dongelmans is unpaid chair of 
National Intensive Care Evaluation Foundation. Dr. Ichihara’s primary 
affiliation is the Department of Healthcare Quality Assessment, which is a 
social collaboration department at the University of Tokyo supported by National 
Clinical Database, Johnson & Johnson K.K., and Nipro Corporation. Dr. 
Vijayaraghavan is the National Coordinator for the Indian Registry of IntenSive 
Care and is supported for 0.5 full-time equivalent hours by funding from the 
Wellcome Trust, U.K. Dr. Bagshaw received funding from Baxter and BioPorto. Dr. 
Hashimoto’s institution received funding from the Japanese Ministry of Health, 
Labour and Welfare for the Japanese Intensive care PAtient Database (JIPAD), the 
Japanese Society of Intensive Care Medicine, and JMS. Dr. Haniffa’s institution 
received funding from Wellcome Trust/COAF and UK Research and Innovation (UKRI); 
he disclosed that he is an honorary director of National Intensive Care 
Surveillance MORU. Dr. Pisani received funding from Wellcome Trust and The 
African Critical Care registry network funded by this UKRI MRC (grant 
MR/V030884/1). The remaining authors have disclosed that they do not have any 
potential conflicts of interest.


31. Hamostaseologie. 2024 Dec;44(6):429-445. doi: 10.1055/a-2415-8408. Epub 2024 Dec 
10.

From Code to Clots: Applying Machine Learning to Clinical Aspects of Venous 
Thromboembolism Prevention, Diagnosis, and Management.

Chrysafi P(1), Lam B(2)(3), Carton S(4), Patell R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Auburn Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States.
(2)Division of Hemostasis and Thrombosis, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States.
(3)Division of Clinical Informatics, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States.
(4)Department of Computer Science, College of Engineering and Physical Sciences, 
University of New Hampshire, Durham, New Hampshire, United States.

The high incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE) globally and the morbidity 
and mortality burden associated with the disease make it a pressing issue. 
Machine learning (ML) can improve VTE prevention, detection, and treatment. The 
ability of this novel technology to process large amounts of high-dimensional 
data can help identify new risk factors and better risk stratify patients for 
thromboprophylaxis. Applications of ML for VTE include systems that interpret 
medical imaging, assess the severity of the VTE, tailor treatment according to 
individual patient needs, and identify VTE cases to facilitate surveillance. 
Generative artificial intelligence may be leveraged to design new molecules such 
as new anticoagulants, generate synthetic data to expand datasets, and reduce 
clinical burden by assisting in generating clinical notes. Potential challenges 
in the applications of these novel technologies include the availability of 
multidimensional large datasets, prospective studies and clinical trials to 
ensure safety and efficacy, continuous quality assessment to maintain algorithm 
accuracy, mitigation of unwanted bias, and regulatory and legal guardrails to 
protect patients and providers. We propose a practical approach for clinicians 
to integrate ML into research, from choosing appropriate problems to integrating 
ML into clinical workflows. ML offers much promise and opportunity for 
clinicians and researchers in VTE to translate this technology into the clinic 
and directly benefit the patients.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2415-8408
PMID: 39657652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


32. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2024 Jun 7;45(6):826-832. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A8211.

Evaluating Biases and Quality Issues in Intermodality Image Translation Studies 
for Neuroradiology: A Systematic Review.

Walston SL(1), Tatekawa H(1), Takita H(1), Miki Y(1), Ueda D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology (S.L.W., 
H.Tatekawa, H.Takita, Y.M., D.U.), Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
Metropolitan University, Osaka, Japan.
(2)From the Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology (S.L.W., 
H.Tatekawa, H.Takita, Y.M., D.U.), Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
Metropolitan University, Osaka, Japan ai.labo.ocu@gmail.com.
(3)Smart Life Science Lab (D.U.), Center for Health Science Innovation, Osaka 
Metropolitan University, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Intermodality image-to-image translation is an artificial 
intelligence technique for generating one technique from another.
PURPOSE: This review was designed to systematically identify and quantify biases 
and quality issues preventing validation and clinical application of artificial 
intelligence models for intermodality image-to-image translation of brain 
imaging.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed, Scopus, and IEEE Xplore were searched through August 2, 
2023, for artificial intelligence-based image translation models of radiologic 
brain images.
STUDY SELECTION: This review collected 102 works published between April 2017 
and August 2023.
DATA ANALYSIS: Eligible studies were evaluated for quality using the Checklist 
for Artificial Intelligence in Medical Imaging (CLAIM) and for bias using the 
Prediction model Risk Of Bias ASsessment Tool (PROBAST). Medically-focused 
article adherence was compared with that of engineering-focused articles overall 
with the Mann-Whitney U test and for each criterion using the Fisher exact test.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Median adherence to the relevant CLAIM criteria was 69% and 38% 
for PROBAST questions. CLAIM adherence was lower for engineering-focused 
articles compared with medically-focused articles (65% versus 73%, P < .001). 
Engineering-focused studies had higher adherence for model description criteria, 
and medically-focused studies had higher adherence for data set and evaluation 
descriptions.
LIMITATIONS: Our review is limited by the study design and model heterogeneity.
CONCLUSIONS: Nearly all studies revealed critical issues preventing clinical 
application, with engineering-focused studies showing higher adherence for the 
technical model description but significantly lower overall adherence than 
medically-focused studies. The pursuit of clinical application requires 
collaboration from both fields to improve reporting.

© 2024 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A8211
PMCID: PMC11288590
PMID: 38663993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2023 Feb 24;18(2):e0280609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280609. 
eCollection 2023.

Bayesian network modeling of risk and prodromal markers of Parkinson's disease.

Sood M(1)(2), Suenkel U(3), von Thaler AK(4), Zacharias HU(5)(6), Brockmann 
K(4)(7), Eschweiler GW(3)(8), Maetzler W(9), Berg D(4)(9), Fröhlich H(1)(2), 
Heinzel S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and 
Scientific Computing (SCAI), Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(2)Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Tübingen University Hospital, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center 
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(6)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel University and University 
Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(7)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Geriatric Center, Tübingen University Hospital, Tübingen, Germany.
(9)Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany.
(10)Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, Kiel University, University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by a long prodromal phase with a 
multitude of markers indicating an increased PD risk prior to clinical diagnosis 
based on motor symptoms. Current PD prediction models do not consider 
interdependencies of single predictors, lack differentiation by subtypes of 
prodromal PD, and may be limited and potentially biased by confounding factors, 
unspecific assessment methods and restricted access to comprehensive marker data 
of prospective cohorts. We used prospective data of 18 established risk and 
prodromal markers of PD in 1178 healthy, PD-free individuals and 24 incident PD 
cases collected longitudinally in the Tübingen evaluation of Risk factors for 
Early detection of NeuroDegeneration (TREND) study at 4 visits over up to 10 
years. We employed artificial intelligence (AI) to learn and quantify PD marker 
interdependencies via a Bayesian network (BN) with probabilistic confidence 
estimation using bootstrapping. The BN was employed to generate a synthetic 
cohort and individual marker profiles. Robust interdependencies were observed 
for BN edges from age to subthreshold parkinsonism and urinary dysfunction, sex 
to substantia nigra hyperechogenicity, depression, non-smoking and to 
constipation; depression to symptomatic hypotension and excessive daytime 
somnolence; solvent exposure to cognitive deficits and to physical inactivity; 
and non-smoking to physical inactivity. Conversion to PD was interdependent with 
prior subthreshold parkinsonism, sex and substantia nigra hyperechogenicity. 
Several additional interdependencies with lower probabilistic confidence were 
identified. Synthetic subjects generated via the BN based representation of the 
TREND study were realistic as assessed through multiple comparison approaches of 
real and synthetic data. Altogether our work demonstrates the potential of 
modern AI approaches (specifically BNs) both for modelling and understanding 
interdependencies between PD risk and prodromal markers, which are so far not 
accounted for in PD prediction models, as well as for generating realistic 
synthetic data.

Copyright: © 2023 Sood et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0280609
PMCID: PMC9955606
PMID: 36827273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


34. Sensors (Basel). 2025 Jul 10;25(14):4305. doi: 10.3390/s25144305.

Synthetic Patient-Physician Conversations Simulated by Large Language Models: A 
Multi-Dimensional Evaluation.

Haider SA(1), Prabha S(1), Gomez-Cabello CA(1), Borna S(1), Genovese A(1), 
Trabilsy M(1), Collaco BG(1), Wood NG(2), Bagaria S(3), Tao C(4), Forte 
AJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology AI IT, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Division of Surgical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(4)Department of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
(5)Center for Digital Health, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: Data accessibility remains a significant barrier in healthcare AI 
due to privacy constraints and logistical challenges. Synthetic data, which 
mimics real patient information while remaining both realistic and 
non-identifiable, offers a promising solution. Large Language Models (LLMs) 
create new opportunities to generate high-fidelity clinical conversations 
between patients and physicians. However, the value of this synthetic data 
depends on careful evaluation of its realism, accuracy, and practical relevance.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the performance of four leading LLMs: ChatGPT 4.5, ChatGPT 
4o, Claude 3.7 Sonnet, and Gemini Pro 2.5 in generating synthetic transcripts of 
patient-physician interactions in plastic surgery scenarios.
METHODS: Each model generated transcripts for ten plastic surgery scenarios. 
Transcripts were independently evaluated by three clinically trained raters 
using a seven-criterion rubric: Medical Accuracy, Realism, Persona Consistency, 
Fidelity, Empathy, Relevancy, and Usability. Raters were blinded to the model 
identity to reduce bias. Each was rated on a 5-point Likert scale, yielding 840 
total evaluations. Descriptive statistics were computed, and a two-way repeated 
measures ANOVA was used to test for differences across models and metrics. In 
addition, transcripts were analyzed using automated linguistic and content-based 
metrics.
RESULTS: All models achieved strong performance, with mean ratings exceeding 4.5 
across all criteria. Gemini 2.5 Pro received mean scores (5.00 ± 0.00) in 
Medical Accuracy, Realism, Persona Consistency, Relevancy, and Usability. Claude 
3.7 Sonnet matched the scores in Persona Consistency and Relevancy and led in 
Empathy (4.96 ± 0.18). ChatGPT 4.5 also achieved perfect scores in Relevancy, 
with high scores in Empathy (4.93 ± 0.25) and Usability (4.96 ± 0.18). ChatGPT 
4o demonstrated consistently strong but slightly lower performance across most 
dimensions. ANOVA revealed no statistically significant differences across 
models (F(3, 6) = 0.85, p = 0.52). Automated analysis showed substantial 
variation in transcript length, style, and content richness: Gemini 2.5 Pro 
generated the longest and most emotionally expressive dialogues, while ChatGPT 
4o produced the shortest and most concise outputs.
CONCLUSIONS: Leading LLMs can generate medically accurate, emotionally 
appropriate synthetic dialogues suitable for educational and research use. 
Despite high performance, demographic homogeneity in generated patients 
highlights the need for improved diversity and bias mitigation in model outputs. 
These findings support the cautious, context-aware integration of LLM-generated 
dialogues into medical training, simulation, and research.

DOI: 10.3390/s25144305
PMCID: PMC12298718
PMID: 40732431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.


35. J Med Internet Res. 2025 Feb 10;27:e60888. doi: 10.2196/60888.

Machine Learning in the Management of Patients Undergoing Catheter Ablation for 
Atrial Fibrillation: Scoping Review.

Luo A(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen W(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhu H(1)(3)(4)(5), Xie W(2)(3)(4)(6), 
Chen X(1)(4)(5), Liu Z(1)(4)(7), Xin Z(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medical Information Research (Central South University), 
College of Hunan Province, Changsha, China.
(4)Clinical Research Center For Cardiovascular Intelligent Healthcare In Hunan 
Province, Changsha, China.
(5)Information and Network Center, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.
(6)The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.
(7)Department of Cardiology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: Although catheter ablation (CA) is currently the most effective 
clinical treatment for atrial fibrillation, its variable therapeutic effects 
among different patients present numerous problems. Machine learning (ML) shows 
promising potential in optimizing the management and clinical outcomes of 
patients undergoing atrial fibrillation CA (AFCA).
OBJECTIVE: This scoping review aimed to evaluate the current scientific evidence 
on the application of ML for managing patients undergoing AFCA, compare the 
performance of various models across specific clinical tasks within AFCA, and 
summarize the strengths and limitations of ML in this field.
METHODS: Adhering to the PRISMA-ScR (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews) guidelines, relevant 
studies published up to October 7, 2023, were searched from PubMed, Web of 
Science, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and ScienceDirect. The final included 
studies were confirmed based on inclusion and exclusion criteria and manual 
review. The PROBAST (Prediction model Risk Of Bias Assessment Tool) and QUADAS-2 
(Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2) methodological quality 
assessment tools were used to review the included studies, and narrative data 
synthesis was performed on the modeled results provided by these studies.
RESULTS: The analysis of 23 included studies showcased the contributions of ML 
in identifying potential ablation targets, improving ablation strategies, and 
predicting patient prognosis. The patient data used in these studies comprised 
demographics, clinical characteristics, various types of imaging (9/23, 39%), 
and electrophysiological signals (7/23, 30%). In terms of model type, deep 
learning, represented by convolutional neural networks, was most frequently 
applied (14/23, 61%). Compared with traditional clinical scoring models or human 
clinicians, the model performance reported in the included studies was generally 
satisfactory, but most models (14/23, 61%) showed a high risk of bias due to 
lack of external validation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our evidence-based findings suggest that ML is a promising tool for 
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of managing patients undergoing AFCA. 
While guiding data preparation and model selection for future studies, this 
review highlights the need to address prevalent limitations, including lack of 
external validation, and to further explore model generalization and 
interpretability.

©Aijing Luo, Wei Chen, Hongtao Zhu, Wenzhao Xie, Xi Chen, Zhenjiang Liu, Zirui 
Xin. Originally published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research 
(https://www.jmir.org), 10.02.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/60888
PMCID: PMC11851043
PMID: 39928932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


36. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2025 Apr 24;324:292-297. doi: 10.3233/SHTI250203.

Federated Learning for Healthcare: Class Imbalance Mitigation and Feature Drift 
Detection.

Andres J(1)(2), Hilberger H(1), Hanke S(1), Bödenler M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of eHealth, University of Applied Sciences - FH JOANNEUM, Graz, 
Austria.
(2)AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Graz & Vienna, Austria.

Federated learning (FL) has the potential to revolutionize healthcare by 
enabling collaborative data analysis while keeping data decentralized. 
Monitoring data quality is crucial for successful FL in healthcare, as 
undetected issues can compromise model reliability and fairness. This project 
develops and evaluates a cross-silo FL system for healthcare data using the 
Flower framework, focusing on monitoring metrics and data quality issues such as 
label imbalance and feature drift. Using a harmonized synthetic dataset from the 
LETHE project, the FL system was tested on five clients with varying data 
distributions, including one with a heavily imbalanced dataset. Metrics such as 
accuracy, loss, and Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) were tracked in 
real-time using Prometheus and visualized in Grafana. Results showed that the 
baseline model outperformed the federated model (accuracy: 0.806 vs. 0.754, 
loss: 0.416 vs. 0.545, MCC: 0.445 vs. 0.349); however, the federated model 
demonstrated competitive performance. The customized FedAvg, incorporating label 
distribution and dataset size, remarkably improved the global model's MCC (0.349 
vs. 0.111). Feature drift detection using the Kolmogorov-Smirnow test was 
successfully integrated into the monitoring system with a visual alert. The 
effectiveness of the customized FedAvg approach across diverse data 
distributions was not thoroughly assessed and could be further explored in 
future research. Additionally, the system could be extended to non-harmonized 
datasets, advanced privacy techniques could be integrated, and the impact of 
different types of feature drift on model performance could be investigated. 
This project demonstrates the importance of monitoring systems for ensuring 
reliable and fair FL models in healthcare applications.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI250203
PMID: 40270427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Sports Med. 2025 Aug;55(8):2019-2037. doi: 10.1007/s40279-025-02221-6. Epub 2025 
Jun 26.

Synthetic Data for Sharing and Exploration in High-Performance Sport: 
Considerations for Application.

Warmenhoven J(1)(2), Impellizzeri FM(3), Shrier I(4), Vigotsky AD(5)(6), Lolli 
L(7), Menaspà P(8), Coutts AJ(3), Fanchini M(9)(10), Hooker G(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation and Human Performance Research 
Centre, University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Sydney, Australia. 
john.warmenhoven@hotmail.com.
(2)Australian Institute of Sport, Australian Sports Commission, Canberra, 
Australia. john.warmenhoven@hotmail.com.
(3)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation and Human Performance Research 
Centre, University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Sydney, Australia.
(4)Centre for Clinical Epidemiology, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General 
Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(5)Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Statistics, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Department of Sport and Exercise Sciences, Institute of Sport, Manchester 
Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK.
(8)Australian Institute of Sport, Australian Sports Commission, Canberra, 
Australia.
(9)AS Roma Performance Department, AS Roma Football Club, Rome, Italy.
(10)Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(11)Research School of Finance, Actuarial Science and Statistics, Australian 
National University, Canberra, Australia.
(12)The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Synthetic data represent alternative data sources generated using 
mathematical procedures to address specific issues in research and practice. 
Synthetic data have emerging applications in clinical and medical data contexts 
and may assist in overcoming privacy issues to help support open science 
practice.
OBJECTIVE: The present study discusses the applicability of an established 
synthetic data generation process using sequential tree-based algorithms 
(synthpop package in R) in the context of athlete monitoring data in sport, with 
the aim of providing an educational primer and discussion for potential 
application of these methods when exploring issues in the field sports and 
exercise sciences.
METHODS: The software package in R, synthpop, was used in seven simulation 
conditions applied to a professional football dataset, with varying model 
constraints. Classification and regression trees were used as the base model 
framework for each simulation. Metrics associated with both global utility 
(overall dataset similarity) and specific utility (specific research outcome 
similarity) were assessed on each simulation condition.
RESULTS: All simulation conditions demonstrated high levels of global utility. 
Additionally, simpler simulation conditions, which more closely resembled the 
analysis of the original dataset (simulation condition 1 and 2), provided higher 
specific utility than more advanced simulation conditions.
CONCLUSION: To summarize, three types of models can be conceptualised for 
generating synthetic data: (1) models used for analysis of the original data 
(answering specific research questions), (2) models used to generate synthetic 
data, and (3) models that represent the true generation process for the original 
data. Misalignments in the specifications of these models might introduce biases 
that can compromise the utility of synthetic data no matter the purpose. As 
synthetic data do not constitute a direct replacement for real data from 
conceptual and empirical standpoints, we believe that researchers embracing this 
practice must include sufficient documentation concerning the synthetic data 
generation process purpose, the predictors and model used, and the potential 
boundary conditions for using the synthetic data in future investigations in 
sports and other fields.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40279-025-02221-6
PMCID: PMC12460485
PMID: 40569343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Funding: J.W. (lead author) was 
supported by the Australian Institute Sport for research funding of his 
postdoctoral fellowship, for which this publication is an output. No other 
sources of funding were used to assist in the conduct of this study. Conflicts 
of Interest: All authors have read the Springer editorial policy on 
competing/conflicts of interest and can confirm that they have fully considered 
and complied with this policy. Author Contributions: J.W. led the investigation 
and topic formation; J.W. and F.I. led the initial conceptualization; J.W., 
F.I., G.H., A.V., and I.S. contributed to the development of ideas for 
simulations in the manuscript; all authors contributed to the writing of this 
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version. Author 
Declarations: The views and opinions expressed in this article by author(s) 
affiliated with the Australian Institute of Sport are solely their own and do 
not necessarily represent or reflect the official policy or position of the 
Australian Institute of Sport. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of 
the author(s). Data Availability: No original data are publicly released with 
this article; however, as per Supplementary Material S5, synthetic datasets 
generated using two different sets of simulation conditions have been released 
with this manuscript and are available at: 
https://github.com/johnwarmenhoven/SynthData_in_Sport/tree/main/R-Code/Example%20Synthetic%20Datasets 
.


38. Comput Biol Med. 2025 Apr;188:109830. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.109830. 
Epub 2025 Feb 20.

Addressing imbalance in health data: Synthetic minority oversampling using deep 
learning.

Wang AX(1), Le VT(2), Trung HN(3), Nguyen BP(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Victoria University of Wellington, 
Kelburn Parade, Wellington 6012, New Zealand. Electronic address: 
alex.wang@vuw.ac.nz.
(2)Faculty of Information Technology, Ho Chi Minh City Open University, 97 Vo 
Van Tan, District 3, Ho Chi Minh City 70000, Viet Nam. Electronic address: 
tuan.lv@ou.edu.vn.
(3)Faculty of Information Technology, Ho Chi Minh City Open University, 97 Vo 
Van Tan, District 3, Ho Chi Minh City 70000, Viet Nam. Electronic address: 
hau.nt@ou.edu.vn.
(4)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Victoria University of Wellington, 
Kelburn Parade, Wellington 6012, New Zealand. Electronic address: 
binh.p.nguyen@vuw.ac.nz.

Class imbalances in healthcare data, characterized by a disproportionate number 
of positive cases compared to negative ones, can lead to biased machine learning 
models that favor the majority class. Ensuring good performance across all 
classes is crucial for improving healthcare delivery and patient safety. 
Traditional oversampling methods like SMOTE and its variants face several 
limitations: they struggle with capturing complex data distributions, handling 
heterogeneous data types, and natively supporting multi-class datasets. To 
address these issues, we propose a deep learning based solution using an 
Auxiliary-guided Conditional Variational Autoencoder (ACVAE) enhanced with 
contrastive learning. Additionally, we introduce an ensemble technique where 
ACVAE creates synthetic positive samples, followed by the use of the Edited 
Centroid-Displacement Nearest Neighbor (ECDNN) algorithm to reduce the majority 
class. This combined approach takes advantage of ACVAE's ability to produce 
diverse oversampled data and ECDNN's skill in handling noise through selective 
undersampling, leading to a more balanced and informative dataset. Our 
experiments on 12 different health datasets show the effectiveness of our 
method. We conduct a thorough evaluation of our approach against traditional 
oversampling techniques and several benchmark machine learning models. The 
results demonstrate notable improvements in model performance across various 
metrics, highlighting the potential of deep learning based synthetic 
oversampling to address class imbalances in healthcare data.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.109830
PMID: 39983361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they do not have any competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have influenced the findings presented in this 
manuscript.


39. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform. 2026 Feb;30(2):1666-1679. doi: 
10.1109/JBHI.2025.3595371.

Advancing Cancer Research With Synthetic Data Generation in Low-Data Scenarios.

Apellaniz PA, Galende BA, Jimenez A, Parras J, Zazo S.

The scarcity of medical data, particularly in Survival Analysis (SA) for 
cancer-related diseases, challenges data-driven healthcare research. While 
Synthetic Tabular Data Generation (STDG) models have been proposed to address 
this issue, most rely on datasets with abundant samples, which do not reflect 
real-world limitations. We suggest using an STDG approach that leverages 
transfer learning and meta-learning techniques to create an artificial inductive 
bias, guiding generative models trained on limited samples. Experiments on 
classification datasets across varying sample sizes validated the method's 
robustness, with further clinical utility assessment on cancer-related SA data. 
While divergence-based similarity validation proved effective in capturing 
improvements in generation quality, clinical utility validation showed limited 
sensitivity to sample size, highlighting its shortcomings. In SA experiments, we 
observed that altering the task can reveal if relationships among variables are 
accurately generated, with most cases benefiting from the proposed methodology. 
Our findings confirm the method's ability to generate high-quality synthetic 
data under constrained conditions. We emphasize the need to complement 
utility-based validation with similarity metrics, particularly in low-data 
settings, to assess STDG performance reliably.

DOI: 10.1109/JBHI.2025.3595371
PMID: 40758491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Sci Rep. 2025 Jul 29;15(1):27619. doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-10451-x.

Democratizing cost-effective, agentic artificial intelligence to multilingual 
medical summarization through knowledge distillation.

Lee C(1)(2), Kumar S(3), Vogt KA(3), Munshi M(4), Tallapudi P(3), Vogt A(5), 
Awad H(6), Khan W(7).

Author information:
(1)Sporo Health, Boston, MA, USA. chanseo.lee@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06520, 
USA. chanseo.lee@yale.edu.
(3)Sporo Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06520, 
USA.
(5)Girton College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Faculty of Allied Medical Sciences, Middle East University, Amman, Jordan.
(7)Department of Trauma and Orthopedic Surgery, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The increasing demand for multilingual capabilities in healthcare technology 
highlights the critical need for AI solutions capable of handling 
underrepresented languages, such as Arabic, in clinical documentation. Arabic's 
unique linguistic complexities-morphological richness, syntactic variations, and 
diglossia-present significant challenges for foundational large language models 
(LLMs), especially in domain-specific tasks like medical summarization. This 
study introduces AraSum, a domain-specific AI agent built using a novel 
knowledge distillation framework that transforms large multilingual LLMs into 
lightweight, task-optimized small language models (SLMs). Leveraging a synthetic 
dataset of Arabic medical dialogues, AraSum demonstrates superior performance 
over JAIS-30B, a foundational Arabic LLM, across key evaluation metrics, 
including BLEU and ROUGE scores. AraSum also outperforms JAIS in Arabic-speaking 
evaluator assessments of accuracy, comprehensiveness, and clinical utility while 
maintaining comparable linguistic performance as measured by a modified PDQI-9 
inventory. Beyond accuracy, AraSum achieves these results with significantly 
lower computational and environmental costs, demonstrating the feasibility of 
deploying resource-efficient AI models in low-resource settings for 
domain-specific tasks. This work underscores the potential of SLM-based agentic 
architectures for advancing multilingual healthcare, encouraging sustainable 
artificial intelligence, and fostering equity in access to care.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-10451-x
PMCID: PMC12307869
PMID: 40730812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: An 
author-affiliated entity, Sporo Health, has filed US provisional patent 
application 63/729,037 relating to medical AI systems implementing 
domain-specific AI agents, which includes the development and implementation of 
the Sporo AraSum model presented in the manuscript. All authors affiliated with 
Sporo Health have commercial interest in the work described. No external funders 
of Sporo Health or other author-affiliated institutions contributed 
intellectually or financially to this project. Computational support was offered 
by the Microsoft for Startups, Google, and Amazon Web Services, but had no role 
in study design, data collection or analysis, decision to publish, or 
preparation of the manuscript.


41. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2024 Dec 28;24(1):409. doi: 
10.1186/s12911-024-02825-4.

The aluminum standard: using generative Artificial Intelligence tools to 
synthesize and annotate non-structured patient data.

Diaz Ochoa JG(1)(2), Mustafa FE(3), Weil F(3), Wang Y(4), Kama K(5), Knott M(5).

Author information:
(1)QuiBiQ GmbH, Heßbrühlstr. 11, Stuttgart, D-70565, Germany. 
Juan.diaz@permediq.de.
(2)PerMediQ GmbH, Salzbergweg 18, Wang, D-85368, Germany. Juan.diaz@permediq.de.
(3)QuiBiQ GmbH, Heßbrühlstr. 11, Stuttgart, D-70565, Germany.
(4)Analytic Computing Department, University of Stuttgart, Institute for 
Artificial Intelligence, Universitätsstraße 32, Stuttgart, D-70569, Germany.
(5)Klinikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart Cancer Center - Tumorzentrum Eva Mayr-Stihl DE, 
Kriegsbergstraße 60, Stuttgart, D-70174, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Medical narratives are fundamental to the correct identification of 
a patient's health condition. This is not only because it describes the 
patient's situation. It also contains relevant information about the patient's 
context and health state evolution. Narratives are usually vague and cannot be 
categorized easily. On the other hand, once the patient's situation is correctly 
identified based on a narrative, it is then possible to map the patient's 
situation into precise classification schemas and ontologies that are 
machine-readable. To this end, language models can be trained to read and 
extract elements from these narratives. However, the main problem is the lack of 
data for model identification and model training in languages other than 
English. First, gold standard annotations are usually not available due to the 
high level of data protection for patient data. Second, gold standard 
annotations (if available) are difficult to access. Alternative available data, 
like MIMIC (Sci Data 3:1, 2016) is written in English and for specific patient 
conditions like intensive care. Thus, when model training is required for other 
types of patients, like oncology (and not intensive care), this could lead to 
bias. To facilitate clinical narrative model training, a method for creating 
high-quality synthetic narratives is needed.
METHOD: We devised workflows based on generative AI methods to synthesize 
narratives in the German language to avoid the disclosure of patient's health 
data. Since we required highly realistic narratives, we generated prompts, 
written with high-quality medical terminology, asking for clinical narratives 
containing both a main and co-disease. The frequency of distribution of both the 
main and co-disease was extracted from the hospital's structured data, such that 
the synthetic narratives reflect the disease distribution among the patient's 
cohort. In order to validate the quality of the synthetic narratives, we 
annotated them to train a Named Entity Recognition (NER) algorithm. According to 
our assumptions, the validation of this system implies that the synthesized data 
used for its training are of acceptable quality.
RESULT: We report precision, recall and F1 score for the NER model while also 
considering metrics that take into account both exact and partial entity 
matches. Trained models are cautious, with a precision up to 0.8 for Entity Type 
match metric and a F1 score of 0.3.
CONCLUSION: Despite its inherent limitations, this technology has the potential 
to allow data interoperability by using encoded diseases across languages and 
regions without compromising data safety. Additionally, it facilitates the 
synthesis of unstructured patient data. In this way, the identification and 
training of models can be accelerated. We believe that this method may be able 
to generate discharge letters for any combination of main and co-diseases, which 
will significantly reduce the amount of time spent writing these letters by 
healthcare professionals.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-024-02825-4
PMCID: PMC11681671
PMID: 39732668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was approved by Ethics Committee at the 
Baden-Württemberg State Medical Association (Ethik-Kommission bei der 
Landesärztekammer Baden-Württemberg), with approval number F-2023-125. The study 
was performed in compliance with the World Medical Association Declaration of 
Helsinki on Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects, 
and research regulations of the country. The informed consent requirement is 
waived due to the state regulations of the Landeskrankenhausgesetz 
Baden-Württemberg (LKHG), owing to the retrospective, aggregated and anonymized 
nature of this study and of the database. Consent for publication: Not 
applicable. Competing interests: Felix Weil, Faizan E Mustafa & Juan G. Diaz 
Ochoa are employed at QuiBiQ GmbH. All other authors have no competing interest.


42. J Biomed Inform. 2025 Nov;171:104929. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104929. Epub 2025 
Oct 17.

Synthetic-to-real attentive deep learning for Alzheimer's assessment: A 
domain-agnostic framework for ROCF scoring.

Bouali KA(1), Šikudová E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Software and Computer Science Education, Faculty of Mathematics 
and Physics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address: 
kassemanis@outlook.com.
(2)Department of Software and Computer Science Education, Faculty of Mathematics 
and Physics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.

OBJECTIVE: Early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease depends on accessible 
cognitive assessments, such as the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure (ROCF) test. 
However, manual scoring of this test is labor-intensive and subjective, which 
introduces experimental biases. Additionally, deep learning models face 
challenges due to the limited availability of annotated clinical data, 
particularly for assessments like the ROCF test. This scarcity of data restricts 
model generalization and exacerbates domain shifts across different populations.
METHODS: We propose a novel framework comprising a data synthesis pipeline and 
ROCF-Net, a deep learning model specifically designed for ROCF scoring. The 
synthesis pipeline is lightweight and capable of generating realistic, diverse, 
and annotated ROCF drawings. ROCF-Net, on the other hand, is a cross-domain 
scoring model engineered to address domain discrepancies in stroke texture and 
line artifacts. It maintains high scoring accuracy through a novel line-specific 
attention mechanism tailored to the unique characteristics of ROCF drawings.
RESULTS: Unlike conventional synthetic medical imaging methods, our approach 
generates ROCF drawings that accurately reflect Alzheimer's-specific 
abnormalities with minimal computational cost. Our scoring model achieves SOTA 
performance across differently sourced datasets, with a Mean Absolute Error 
(MAE) of 3.53 and a Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) of 0.86. This 
demonstrates both high predictive accuracy and computational efficiency, 
outperforming existing ROCF scoring methods that rely on Convolutional Neural 
Networks (CNNs) while avoiding the overhead of parameter-heavy transformer 
models. We also show that training on our synthetic data generalizes as well as 
training on real clinical data, where the difference in performance was minimal 
(MAE differed by 1.43 and PCC by 0.07), indicating no statistically significant 
performance gap.
CONCLUSION: Our work introduces four contributions: (1) a cost-effective 
pipeline for generating synthetic ROCF data, reducing dependency on clinical 
datasets; (2) a domain-agnostic model for automated ROCF scoring across diverse 
drawing styles; (3) a lightweight attention mechanism aligning model decisions 
with clinical scoring for transparency; and (4) a bias-aware framework using 
synthetic data to reduce demographic disparities, promoting fair cognitive 
assessment across populations.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104929
PMID: 41110737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


43. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2025 Jun 26;328:81-85. doi: 10.3233/SHTI250677.

Challenges and Risks of Using Synthetic Data for AI-Driven Healthcare 
Applications.

Karoulla E(1), Matragkas N(1), Islam SU(2), Epiphaniou G(2).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France.
(2)WMG, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom.

Synthetic data utilization for model training in healthcare has grown in the 
last 15 years. However, there are several risks associated with this approach 
such as, privacy issues, where the patient's data can be identifiable; data 
quality, where the complexity of the real-world scenarios is not captured; and 
ethical concerns, concerning malicious misuse. This paper highlights the 
challenges of using synthetic data by outlining the risks to contribute to 
developing more reliable, fair, and solutions.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI250677
PMID: 40588885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nurse Educ Today. 2025 Oct;153:106822. doi: 10.1016/j.nedt.2025.106822. Epub 
2025 Jul 5.

Patterns, advances, and gaps in using ChatGPT and similar technologies in 
nursing education: A PAGER scoping review.

Amankwaa I(1), Ekpor E(2), Cudjoe D(3), Kobiah E(4), Fuseini AJ(5), Diebieri 
M(6), Gyamfi S(7), Brownie S(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nursing, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New 
Zealand. Electronic address: Isaac.amankwaa@aut.ac.nz.
(2)School of Nursing and Midwifery, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(3)St. Michael Catholic Nursing and Midwifery Training College, Pramso, Ghana.
(4)Department of Nursing, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, 
Kumasi, Ghana.
(5)Nursing Department, Health School, University of Algarve, 8000 Faro, 
Portugal.
(6)Nursing and Midwifery Training College, Kpembe, Salaga, Ghana.
(7)Faculty of Nursing, University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, Canada.
(8)School of Health Sciences, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, VIC, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Generative AI (GenAI) can transform nursing education and 
modernise content delivery. However, the rapid integration of these tools has 
raised concerns about academic integrity and teaching quality. Previous reviews 
have either looked broadly at artificial intelligence or focused narrowly on 
single tools like ChatGPT. This scoping review uses a structured framework to 
identify patterns, advances, gaps, evidence, and recommendations for 
implementing GenAI in nursing education.
METHODS: This scoping review followed the JBI methodology and PRISMA-ScR 
guidelines. We searched PubMed, CINAHL, SCOPUS, ERIC, and grey literature 
(October to November 2024). Data synthesis utilised the PAGER framework as a 
mapping tool to organise and describe patterns, advances, gaps, evidence for 
practice, and recommendations.
RESULTS: Analysis of 107 studies revealed GenAI implementation across four key 
domains: assessment and evaluation, clinical simulation, educational content 
development, and faculty/student support. Three distinct implementation patterns 
emerged: restrictive, integrative, and hybrid approaches, with hybrid models 
demonstrating superior adoption outcomes. Technical advances showed significant 
improvement from GPT-3.5 (75.3 % accuracy) to GPT-4 (88.67 % accuracy) in 
NCLEX-style assessments, with enhanced capabilities in multilingual assessment, 
clinical scenario generation, and adaptive content creation. Major gaps included 
limited methodological rigour (29.0 % of empirical studies), inconsistent 
quality control, verification challenges, equity concerns, and inadequate 
faculty training. Geographic distribution showed North American (42.1 %) and 
Asian (29.9 %) dominance, with ChatGPT representing 83.2 % of tool 
implementations. Key recommendations include developing institutional policies, 
establishing quality verification protocols, enhancing faculty training 
programs, and addressing digital equity concerns to optimise GenAI integration 
in nursing education.
CONCLUSIONS: GenAI has transformative potential in nursing education. To realise 
its full potential and ensure responsible use, research should focus on 
developing standardised governance frameworks, empirically validating outcomes, 
developing faculty in AI literacy, and improving technical infrastructure for 
low-income contexts. Such efforts should involve international collaboration, 
highlighting the importance of the audience's role in the global healthcare 
community.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nedt.2025.106822
PMID: 40644844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


45. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2025 Jan 1;32(1):206-217. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocae273.

A machine learning framework to adjust for learning effects in medical device 
safety evaluation.

Koola JD(1), Ramesh K(2), Mao J(3), Ahn M(4), Davis SE(5), Govindarajulu U(6), 
Perkins AM(7)(8), Westerman D(5), Ssemaganda H(9), Speroff T(7)(10), 
Ohno-Machado L(11), Ramsay CR(12), Sedrakyan A(3), Resnic FS(9)(13), Matheny 
ME(5)(7)(8)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 
92093, United States.
(2)School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093, 
United States.
(3)Department of Population Health Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY 10065, United States.
(4)Jacobs School of Engineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA 92093, United States.
(5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN 37203, United States.
(6)Center for Biostatistics, Department of Population Health Science and Policy, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, United States.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
TN 37232, United States.
(8)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Care Center, Tennessee Valley 
Healthcare System VA, Nashville, TN 37212, United States.
(9)Comparative Effectiveness Research Institute, Lahey Hospital and Medical 
Center, Burlington, MA 01803, United States.
(10)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States.
(11)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Data Science, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, United States.
(12)Health Services Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, 
United Kingdom.
(13)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Lahey Hospital and Medical Center, 
Burlington, MA 01805, United States.

OBJECTIVES: Traditional methods for medical device post-market surveillance 
often fail to accurately account for operator learning effects, leading to 
biased assessments of device safety. These methods struggle with non-linearity, 
complex learning curves, and time-varying covariates, such as physician 
experience. To address these limitations, we sought to develop a machine 
learning (ML) framework to detect and adjust for operator learning effects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A gradient-boosted decision tree ML method was used to 
analyze synthetic datasets that replicate the complexity of clinical scenarios 
involving high-risk medical devices. We designed this process to detect learning 
effects using a risk-adjusted cumulative sum method, quantify the excess adverse 
event rate attributable to operator inexperience, and adjust for these alongside 
patient factors in evaluating device safety signals. To maintain integrity, we 
employed blinding between data generation and analysis teams. Synthetic data 
used underlying distributions and patient feature correlations based on clinical 
data from the Department of Veterans Affairs between 2005 and 2012. We generated 
2494 synthetic datasets with widely varying characteristics including number of 
patient features, operators and institutions, and the operator learning form. 
Each dataset contained a hypothetical study device, Device B, and a reference 
device, Device A. We evaluated accuracy in identifying learning effects and 
identifying and estimating the strength of the device safety signal. Our 
approach also evaluated different clinically relevant thresholds for safety 
signal detection.
RESULTS: Our framework accurately identified the presence or absence of learning 
effects in 93.6% of datasets and correctly determined device safety signals in 
93.4% of cases. The estimated device odds ratios' 95% confidence intervals were 
accurately aligned with the specified ratios in 94.7% of datasets. In contrast, 
a comparative model excluding operator learning effects significantly 
underperformed in detecting device signals and in accuracy. Notably, our 
framework achieved 100% specificity for clinically relevant safety signal 
thresholds, although sensitivity varied with the threshold applied.
DISCUSSION: A machine learning framework, tailored for the complexities of 
post-market device evaluation, may provide superior performance compared to 
standard parametric techniques when operator learning is present.
CONCLUSION: Demonstrating the capacity of ML to overcome complex evaluative 
challenges, our framework addresses the limitations of traditional statistical 
methods in current post-market surveillance processes. By offering a reliable 
means to detect and adjust for learning effects, it may significantly improve 
medical device safety evaluation.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocae273
PMCID: PMC11648715
PMID: 39471493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We wish to confirm for all authors that there 
are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there 
has been no significant financial support for this work that could have 
influenced its outcome.


46. Crit Care Med. 2025 Sep 1;53(9):e1815-e1820. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006741. 
Epub 2025 Jun 9.

Consideration of Sociodemographics in Machine Learning-Driven Sepsis Risk 
Prediction.

Hauschildt KE(1), Pan A(1), Bernstein T(1), Admon AJ(2)(3)(4), Mukherjee B(5), 
Iwashyna TJ(1)(6), Rountree L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)VA Center for Clinical Management Research, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, 
Ann Arbor, MI.
(4)School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(5)School of Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
(6)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.

OBJECTIVES: Use of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) in 
prediction of sepsis and related outcomes is growing. Guidelines call for 
explicit reporting of study data demographics and stratified performance 
analyses to assess potential sociodemographic bias. We assessed reporting of 
sociodemographic data and other considerations, such as use of stratified 
analyses or use of so-call "fairness metrics", among AI and ML models in sepsis.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed identified systematic and narrative reviews from which 
studies were extracted using PubMed and Google Scholar.
STUDY SELECTION: Studies were extracted from selected review articles published 
between January 1, 2023, and June 30, 2024, and related to sepsis, risk 
prediction, and ML; we extracted studies predicting sepsis, sepsis-related 
outcomes, or sepsis treatment in adult populations.
DATA EXTRACTION: Data were extracted by two reviewers using predefined forms, 
and included study type, outcome of interest, setting, dataset used, reporting 
of sample sociodemographics, inclusion of sociodemographics as predictors, 
stratification by sociodemographics or assessment of fairness metrics, and 
reporting a lack of sociodemographic considerations as a limitation.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Thirteen of 96 review studies (14%) met inclusion criteria: six 
systematic reviews and seven narrative reviews. One hundred twenty of 170 
studies (71%) extracted from these review articles were included in our review. 
Ninety-nine of 120 studies (83%) reported a measure of geography or where data 
was collected. Eighty (67%) reported sex/gender, 24 (20%) reported 
race/ethnicity, and 4 (3%) reported other sociodemographics. Only three 
stratified performance results (2%) by sociodemographics; none reported formal 
fairness metrics. Beyond a lack of geographic heterogeneity (39/120, 33%), few 
studies reported a lack of sociodemographic consideration as a limitation.
CONCLUSIONS: The inclusion of sociodemographic data and stratified assessment of 
performance-essential steps in developing equitable risk prediction tools-are 
possible but have yet to be consistently adopted.

Copyright © 2025 by the Society of Critical Care Medicine and Wolters Kluwer 
Health, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0000000000006741
PMID: 40488579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Admon’s institution received funding from 
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; he received support for article 
research from the National Institutes of Health. The remaining authors have 
disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest.


47. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2025 Mar;260:108571. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2024.108571. Epub 2024 Dec 28.

Preserving privacy in healthcare: A systematic review of deep learning 
approaches for synthetic data generation.

Liu Y(1), Acharya UR(2), Tan JH(3).

Author information:
(1)NUS-ISS, 25 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Singapore, 119615, Singapore.
(2)Centre for Health Research, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield, 
Australia; School of Mathematics, Physics and Computing, University of Southern 
Queensland, Springfield, Australia.
(3)Data Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Singapore General Hospital, 
Singapore. Electronic address: tanjenhong@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Data sharing in healthcare is vital for advancing research and 
personalized medicine. However, the process is hindered by privacy, ethical, and 
legal challenges associated with patient data. Synthetic data generation emerges 
as a promising solution, replicating statistical properties of real data while 
enhancing privacy protection.
METHODS: This systematic review examines deep learning techniques for synthetic 
data generation in healthcare, focusing on their ability to maintain data 
utility and enhance privacy. Studies from Scopus, Web of Science, PubMed, and 
IEEE databases published between 2019 and 2023 were analyzed. Key methods 
explored include Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), Variational 
Autoencoders (VAEs), and Diffusion Models. Evaluation metrics encompass data 
resemblance, utility, and privacy preservation, with special attention to 
privacy-enhancing methods like differential privacy and federated learning.
RESULTS: GANs and VAEs demonstrated robust capabilities in generating realistic 
synthetic data for tabular, signal, image, and multi-modal datasets. 
Privacy-preserving approaches such as differential privacy and adversarial 
training significantly reduced re-identification risks while maintaining data 
fidelity. However, challenges persist in preserving temporal correlations, 
reducing biases, and aligning with regulatory frameworks, particularly for 
longitudinal and high-dimensional data.
CONCLUSION: Synthetic data generation holds significant potential for 
privacy-preserving data sharing in healthcare. Ongoing research is required to 
develop advanced algorithms and evaluation frameworks, ensuring synthetic data's 
quality and privacy. Collaboration between technologists and policymakers is 
essential to create comprehensive guidelines, fostering secure and effective 
data sharing in healthcare.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2024.108571
PMID: 39742693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


48. Med Image Anal. 2022 Jan;75:102278. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2021.102278. Epub 2021 
Oct 23.

Characterizing interactions between cardiac shape and deformation by non-linear 
manifold learning.

Maxime DF(1), Pamela M(2), Patrick C(3), Nicolas D(3).

Author information:
(1)Univ Lyon, UCBL, Inserm, INSA Lyon, CNRS, CREATIS, UMR5220, 
U1294,Villeurbanne 69621, France. Electronic address: 
difolco@creatis.insa-lyon.fr.
(2)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice, Service de Cardiologie, Nice, 
France.
(3)Univ Lyon, UCBL, Inserm, INSA Lyon, CNRS, CREATIS, UMR5220, 
U1294,Villeurbanne 69621, France.

Erratum in
    Med Image Anal. 2022 May;78:102425. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2022.102425.

In clinical routine, high-dimensional descriptors of the cardiac function such 
as shape and deformation are reduced to scalars (e.g. volumes or ejection 
fraction), which limit the characterization of complex diseases. Besides, these 
descriptors undergo interactions depending on disease, which may bias their 
computational analysis. In this paper, we aim at characterizing such 
interactions by unsupervised manifold learning. We propose to use a sparsified 
version of Multiple Manifold Learning to align the latent spaces encoding each 
descriptor and weighting the strength of the alignment depending on each pair of 
samples. While this framework was up to now only applied to link different 
datasets from the same manifold, we demonstrate its relevance to characterize 
the interactions between different but partially related descriptors of the 
cardiac function (shape and deformation). We benchmark our approach against 
linear and non-linear embedding strategies, among which the fusion of manifolds 
by Multiple Kernel Learning, the independent embedding of each descriptor by 
Diffusion Maps, and a strict alignment based on pairwise correspondences. We 
first evaluated the methods on a synthetic dataset from a 0D cardiac model where 
the interactions between descriptors are fully controlled. Then, we transfered 
them to a population of right ventricular meshes from 310 subjects (100 healthy 
and 210 patients with right ventricular disease) obtained from 3D 
echocardiography, where the link between shape and deformation is key for 
disease understanding. Our experiments underline the relevance of jointly 
considering shape and deformation descriptors, and that manifold alignment is 
preferable over fusion for our application. They also confirm at a finer scale 
the characteristic traits of the right ventricular diseases in our population.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2021.102278
PMID: 34731772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


49. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2025 Jan 1;32(1):241-252. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocae278.

Machine learning-based infection diagnostic and prognostic models in post-acute 
care settings: a systematic review.

Xu Z(1), Scharp D(1), Hobensack M(2), Ye J(3), Zou J(4), Ding S(5), Shang J(1), 
Topaz M(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, United States.
(2)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, United States.
(3)Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University, New York, NY 10065, United 
States.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10032, United States.
(5)Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, United States.
(6)Center for Home Care Policy & Research, VNS Health, New York, NY 10001, 
United States.
(7)Data Science Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, United 
States.

Erratum in
    J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2025 Feb 1;32(2):413. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocae309.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to (1) review machine learning (ML)-based models for 
early infection diagnostic and prognosis prediction in post-acute care (PAC) 
settings, (2) identify key risk predictors influencing infection-related 
outcomes, and (3) examine the quality and limitations of these models.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, IEEE Xplore, CINAHL, and 
ACM digital library were searched in February 2024. Eligible studies leveraged 
PAC data to develop and evaluate ML models for infection-related risks. Data 
extraction followed the CHARMS checklist. Quality appraisal followed the PROBAST 
tool. Data synthesis was guided by the socio-ecological conceptual framework.
RESULTS: Thirteen studies were included, mainly focusing on respiratory 
infections and nursing homes. Most used regression models with structured 
electronic health record data. Since 2020, there has been a shift toward 
advanced ML algorithms and multimodal data, biosensors, and clinical notes being 
significant sources of unstructured data. Despite these advances, there is 
insufficient evidence to support performance improvements over traditional 
models. Individual-level risk predictors, like impaired cognition, declined 
function, and tachycardia, were commonly used, while contextual-level predictors 
were barely utilized, consequently limiting model fairness. Major sources of 
bias included lack of external validation, inadequate model calibration, and 
insufficient consideration of data complexity.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Despite the growth of advanced modeling approaches in 
infection-related models in PAC settings, evidence supporting their superiority 
remains limited. Future research should leverage a socio-ecological lens for 
predictor selection and model construction, exploring optimal data modalities 
and ML model usage in PAC, while ensuring rigorous methodologies and fairness 
considerations.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jamia/ocae278
PMCID: PMC11648729
PMID: 39530740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MT and JS are the authors of 2 articles in the 
systematic review. In order to address the conflict of interest and reduce bias, 
DS and JZ assisted ZX with the review of those studies independently.


50. PLoS Comput Biol. 2025 May 19;21(5):e1013080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013080. 
eCollection 2025 May.

Generative AI mitigates representation bias and improves model fairness through 
synthetic health data.

Marchesi R(1)(2), Micheletti N(1)(3), I-Hsien Kuo N(4), Barbieri S(4)(5), Jurman 
G(1)(6), Osmani V(7).

Author information:
(1)Data Science for Health (DSH), Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy.
(2)Department of Mathematics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Big Data Research in Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Queensland Digital Health Centre, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
(7)Digital Environment Research Institute (DERI), Queen Mary University of 
London, London, United Kingdom.

Representation bias in health data can lead to unfair decisions and compromise 
the generalisability of research findings. As a consequence, underrepresented 
subpopulations, such as those from specific ethnic backgrounds or genders, do 
not benefit equally from clinical discoveries. Several approaches have been 
developed to mitigate representation bias, ranging from simple resampling 
methods, such as SMOTE, to recent approaches based on generative adversarial 
networks (GAN). However, generating high-dimensional time-series synthetic 
health data remains a significant challenge. In response, we devised a novel 
architecture (CA-GAN) that synthesises authentic, high-dimensional time series 
data. CA-GAN outperforms state-of-the-art methods in a qualitative and a 
quantitative evaluation while avoiding mode collapse, a serious GAN failure. We 
perform evaluation using 7535 patients with hypotension and sepsis from two 
diverse, real-world clinical datasets. We show that synthetic data generated by 
our CA-GAN improves model fairness in Black patients as well as female patients 
when evaluated separately for each subpopulation. Furthermore, CA-GAN generates 
authentic data of the minority class while faithfully maintaining the original 
distribution of data, resulting in improved performance in a downstream 
predictive task.

Copyright: © 2025 Marchesi et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1013080
PMCID: PMC12112403
PMID: 40388536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


51. Invest Radiol. 2023 Dec 1;58(12):853-864. doi: 10.1097/RLI.0000000000000998. 
Epub 2023 Jul 28.

Amplifying the Effects of Contrast Agents on Magnetic Resonance Images Using a 
Deep Learning Method Trained on Synthetic Data.

Fringuello Mingo A(1), Colombo Serra S, Macula A, Bella D, La Cava F, Alì M, 
Papa S, Tedoldi F, Smits M, Bifone A, Valbusa G.

Author information:
(1)From the Bracco Imaging Spa, Milan, Italy (A.F.M., S.C.S., D.B., F.L.C., 
M.A., F.T., G.V.); Università degli Studi di Torino, Turin, Italy (A.M., A.B.); 
Centro Diagnostico Italiano, Milan, Italy (M.A., S.P.); Department of Radiology 
and Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 
the Netherlands (M.S.); and Medical Delta, Delft, the Netherlands (M.S.).

OBJECTIVES: Artificial intelligence (AI) methods can be applied to enhance 
contrast in diagnostic images beyond that attainable with the standard doses of 
contrast agents (CAs) normally used in the clinic, thus potentially increasing 
diagnostic power and sensitivity. Deep learning-based AI relies on training data 
sets, which should be sufficiently large and diverse to effectively adjust 
network parameters, avoid biases, and enable generalization of the outcome. 
However, large sets of diagnostic images acquired at doses of CA outside the 
standard-of-care are not commonly available. Here, we propose a method to 
generate synthetic data sets to train an "AI agent" designed to amplify the 
effects of CAs in magnetic resonance (MR) images. The method was fine-tuned and 
validated in a preclinical study in a murine model of brain glioma, and extended 
to a large, retrospective clinical human data set.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A physical model was applied to simulate different levels 
of MR contrast from a gadolinium-based CA. The simulated data were used to train 
a neural network that predicts image contrast at higher doses. A preclinical MR 
study at multiple CA doses in a rat model of glioma was performed to tune model 
parameters and to assess fidelity of the virtual contrast images against 
ground-truth MR and histological data. Two different scanners (3 T and 7 T, 
respectively) were used to assess the effects of field strength. The approach 
was then applied to a retrospective clinical study comprising 1990 examinations 
in patients affected by a variety of brain diseases, including glioma, multiple 
sclerosis, and metastatic cancer. Images were evaluated in terms of 
contrast-to-noise ratio and lesion-to-brain ratio, and qualitative scores.
RESULTS: In the preclinical study, virtual double-dose images showed high 
degrees of similarity to experimental double-dose images for both peak 
signal-to-noise ratio and structural similarity index (29.49 dB and 0.914 dB at 
7 T, respectively, and 31.32 dB and 0.942 dB at 3 T) and significant improvement 
over standard contrast dose (ie, 0.1 mmol Gd/kg) images at both field strengths. 
In the clinical study, contrast-to-noise ratio and lesion-to-brain ratio 
increased by an average 155% and 34% in virtual contrast images compared with 
standard-dose images. Blind scoring of AI-enhanced images by 2 neuroradiologists 
showed significantly better sensitivity to small brain lesions compared with 
standard-dose images (4.46/5 vs 3.51/5).
CONCLUSIONS: Synthetic data generated by a physical model of contrast 
enhancement provided effective training for a deep learning model for contrast 
amplification. Contrast above that attainable at standard doses of 
gadolinium-based CA can be generated through this approach, with significant 
advantages in the detection of small low-enhancing brain lesions.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/RLI.0000000000000998
PMCID: PMC10662587
PMID: 37378418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest and sources of funding: 
A.F.M., S.C.S, F.L.C., F.T. and G.V. are Bracco Imaging SpA employees. A.M. 
received a PhD fellowship from Bracco Imaging SpA. D.B. is a Bracco Imaging SpA 
consultant. M.A. is a consultant of Bracco Imaging SpA and of Centro Diagnostico 
Italiano; he receives consultancy fees/salary in light of these consultancies. 
S.P. is a consultant of Centro Diagnostico Italiano. M.S. is a professor and 
radiologist at the Erasmus Medical Center and at the Medical Delta; she received 
fees paid by GE Healthcare (speaker fees), AuntMinnie (speaker fees), and Bracco 
Imaging SpA (consultancy fees). A.B. is a professor at Università degli Studi di 
Torino and a consultant of Bracco Imaging SpA.


52. Radiography (Lond). 2026 Jan;32(1):103244. doi: 10.1016/j.radi.2025.103244. Epub 
2025 Nov 20.

Large language models (LLMs) in radiography research: A narrative review.

Rainey C(1), England A(2), Murphy PC(3), Mohammad AA(4), Hadi YH(5), McEntee 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy, School of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Ireland. Electronic address: 
Clare.Rainey@ucc.ie.
(2)Discipline of Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy, School of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Ireland; Health Sciences Research Centre, UCL 
University College, Odense, Denmark. Electronic address: aengland@ucc.ie.
(3)Discipline of Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy, School of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Ireland. Electronic address: 
Peter.Murphy@ucc.ie.
(4)Discipline of Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy, School of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Ireland; Radiological Sciences Department, 
College of Applied Medical Sciences, Taif University, Taif, Saudi Arabia. 
Electronic address: 121129186@umail.ucc.ie.
(5)Discipline of Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy, School of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Ireland; Department of Medical Imaging and 
Intervention, King Abdullah Medical City (KAMC), Makkah, Saudi Arabia. 
Electronic address: Hadi.y@umail.ucc.ie.
(6)Discipline of Medical Imaging and Radiation Therapy, School of Medicine and 
Health, University College Cork, Ireland; Institute of Regional Health Research, 
University of Southern Denmark, Denmark; Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: mark.mcentee@ucc.ie.

OBJECTIVES: Artificial intelligence (AI) has become increasingly embedded in 
Radiography research and practice, extending beyond diagnostic support and 
workflow optimisation to non-patient-facing applications. Generative AI (GenAI), 
particularly Large Language Models (LLMs), have been used in radiography 
research, generating synthetic data, assisting in literature reviews, and 
facilitating multilingual communication. This narrative review aims to explore 
the opportunities, challenges, and implications of LLM integration in 
radiography research.
KEY FINDINGS: A narrative review approach was employed, identifying relevant 
publications and integrating author-led examples, including survey design, 
translation support, and workflow integration. The literature shows that LLMs 
accelerate research processes by supporting systematic literature retrieval, 
enhancing survey development, generating synthetic imaging data, streamlining 
data analysis and enhancing internationalisation. Case studies highlighted 
measurable benefits, such as improved CT image quality and reduced examination 
times through AI-assisted communication. However, challenges included 
hallucinated outputs, embedded biases, risks to privacy, regulatory challenges 
and environmental costs of model training.
CONCLUSION: GenAI and LLMs offer transformative opportunities for radiography 
research across multiple stages, from study design to dissemination. 
Nonetheless, integration must be accompanied by validation against 
expert-reviewed datasets, transparent reporting, and ethical safeguards to 
ensure reliability.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Radiography researchers should adopt GenAI tools with 
a "trust but verify" approach: leveraging their efficiency while verifying 
outputs through expert oversight. Training, governance, and validation 
frameworks are essential for safe implementation, ensuring these technologies 
augment rather than replace human expertise in radiography research.

Copyright © 2025 The College of Radiographers. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radi.2025.103244
PMID: 41270457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


53. J Med Internet Res. 2025 Aug 19;27:e72400. doi: 10.2196/72400.

Exploring the Application of AI and Extended Reality Technologies in 
Metaverse-Driven Mental Health Solutions: Scoping Review.

Tabassum A(#)(1), Ghaznavi I(#)(2), Abd-Alrazaq A(#)(3), Qadir J(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science and Engineering Department, College of Engineering, Qatar 
University, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Information Technology University, Lahore, Pakistan.
(3)AI Center for Precision Health, Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar, Doha, 
Qatar.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Mental health systems worldwide face unprecedented strain due to 
rising psychological distress, limited access to care, and an insufficient 
number of trained professionals. Even in high-income countries, the ratio of 
patients to health care providers remains inadequate to address demand. Emerging 
technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) and extended reality (XR) are 
being explored to improve access, engagement, and scalability of mental health 
interventions. When integrated into immersive metaverse environments, these 
technologies offer the potential to deliver personalized and emotionally 
responsive mental health care.
OBJECTIVE: This scoping review explores the state-of-the-art applications of AI 
and XR technologies in metaverse frameworks for mental health. It identifies 
technological capabilities, therapeutic benefits, and ethical limitations, 
focusing on governance gaps related to data privacy, patient-clinician dynamics, 
algorithmic bias, digital inequality, and psychological dependency.
METHODS: A systematic search was conducted across 5 electronic databases-PubMed, 
Scopus, IEEE Xplore, PsycINFO, and Google Scholar-for peer-reviewed literature 
published between January 2014 and October 2024. Search terms included 
combinations of "AI," "XR," "VR," "mental health," "psychotherapy," and 
"metaverse." Studies were eligible if they (1) involved mental health 
interventions; (2) used AI or XR within immersive or metaverse-like 
environments; and (3) were empirical, peer-reviewed articles in English. 
Editorials, conference summaries, and articles lacking clinical or technical 
depth were excluded. Two reviewers independently screened titles, abstracts, and 
full texts using predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria, with Cohen κ 
values of 0.85 and 0.80 indicating strong interrater agreement. Risk of bias was 
not assessed due to the scoping nature of the review. Data synthesis followed a 
narrative approach.
RESULTS: Of 1288 articles identified, 48 studies met the inclusion criteria. The 
included studies varied in design and scope, with most studies conducted in 
high-income countries. AI applications included emotion detection, 
conversational agents, and clinical decision-support systems. XR interventions 
ranged from virtual reality-based cognitive behavioral therapy and exposure 
therapy to avatar-guided mindfulness. Several studies reported improvements in 
patient engagement, symptom reduction, and treatment adherence. However, many 
studies were limited by small sample sizes, single-institution settings, and 
lack of longitudinal validation. Ethical risks identified included opaque 
algorithmic processes, risks of psychological overdependence, weak data 
governance, and the exclusion of digitally marginalized populations.
CONCLUSIONS: AI and XR technologies integrated within metaverse settings 
represent promising tools for enhancing mental health care delivery through 
personalization, scalability, and immersive engagement. However, the current 
evidence base is limited by methodological inconsistencies and a lack of 
long-term validation. Future research should use disorder-specific frameworks; 
adopt standardized efficacy measures; and ensure inclusive, ethical, and 
transparent development practices. Strong interdisciplinary governance models 
are essential to support the responsible and equitable integration of AI-driven 
XR technologies into mental health care. The narrative synthesis limits 
generalizability, and the absence of a risk of bias assessment hinders critical 
appraisal.

©Aliya Tabassum, Ibrahim Ghaznavi, Alaa Abd-Alrazaq, Junaid Qadir. Originally 
published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research (https://www.jmir.org), 
19.08.2025.

DOI: 10.2196/72400
PMCID: PMC12405795
PMID: 40829151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


54. J Biomed Inform. 2025 Oct;170:104906. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104906. Epub 2025 
Sep 15.

SynthMedic: Utilizing large language models for synthetic discharge summary 
generation, correction and validation.

Grazhdanski G(1), Vasilev V(2), Vassileva S(3), Taskov D(4), Antova I(5), 
Koychev I(6), Boytcheva S(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Sofia University St. Kliment 
Ohridski, 5 James Bourchier Blvd., Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria. Electronic address: 
ggrazhdans@uni-sofia.bg.
(2)Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Sofia University St. Kliment 
Ohridski, 5 James Bourchier Blvd., Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria; Graphwise, 111R 
Tsarigradsko Shosse, Synergy Tower, fl. 12, Sofia, 1784, Bulgaria. Electronic 
address: vnvasilev1@uni-sofia.bg.
(3)Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Sofia University St. Kliment 
Ohridski, 5 James Bourchier Blvd., Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria. Electronic address: 
svasileva@fmi.uni-sofia.bg.
(4)Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment in Neurology and Psychiatry "St. 
Naum", 1 Dr. Lyuben Rusev St., Sofia, 1113, Bulgaria; Medical University of 
Sofia, 15 Akademik I. E. Geshov Blvd., Sofia, 1431, Bulgaria. Electronic 
address: d.taskov@medfac.mu-sofia.bg.
(5)Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment in Neurology and Psychiatry "St. 
Naum", 1 Dr. Lyuben Rusev St., Sofia, 1113, Bulgaria. Electronic address: 
iantova@medfac.mu-sofia.bg.
(6)Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Sofia University St. Kliment 
Ohridski, 5 James Bourchier Blvd., Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria. Electronic address: 
koychev@fmi.uni-sofia.bg.
(7)Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics, Sofia University St. Kliment 
Ohridski, 5 James Bourchier Blvd., Sofia, 1164, Bulgaria; Graphwise, 111R 
Tsarigradsko Shosse, Synergy Tower, fl. 12, Sofia, 1784, Bulgaria. Electronic 
address: svetla.boytcheva@graphwise.ai.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Synthetic clinical texts can improve transparency and 
reduce bias and costs when training and evaluating specialized language models 
in the medical domain. Synthetic texts are freely shareable, as they contain no 
real patient information, and can be customized for a specific task. The 
objective of this study is to develop a methodology for generating, validating, 
and correcting synthetic discharge summaries using LLMs without requiring any 
real patient data.
METHODS: The proposed approach uses an LLM to generate synthetic discharge 
summaries for specific diseases and standard medical references from Merck 
Manuals to ground the generation in internationally accepted medical practices. 
We validate the generated summaries using LLMs as well as by human expert 
validation. In addition, we propose a method for automatic correction of the 
generated discharge summaries using Knowledge Graphs to ensure medical factual 
correctness.
RESULTS: The conducted human expert evaluation shows that the generated 
synthetic discharge summaries are credible and factually accurate when provided 
with the medical reference context. The generated summaries achieve a System 
Usability Score of 94.35% based on a comprehensive rubric evaluated by medical 
professionals and a score of 93.65% on the Faithfulness metric evaluated by an 
LLM.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed methodology can be utilized to generate high-quality 
synthetic discharge summaries for various diseases. The generated synthetic 
corpus consists of 900 discharge summaries in English representing nine socially 
significant diseases and is publicly available under an open license. The 
community can take advantage of the corpus and proposed methodology to train 
complex machine learning models, helping medical professionals in their daily 
work without using real patient data.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104906
PMID: 40962129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


55. Med Phys. 2024 Sep;51(9):6161-6175. doi: 10.1002/mp.17191. Epub 2024 Jun 3.

The effects of back-projection variants in BPF-like TOF PET reconstruction using 
CNN filtration - Based on simulated and clinical brain data.

Lv L(1), Zeng GL(2), Chen G(3)(4), Ding W(1), Weng F(1), Huang Q(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Utah Valley University, Orem, USA.
(3)University of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The back-projection strategies such as confidence weighting (CW) and 
most likely annihilation position (MLAP) have been adopted into 
back-projection-and-filtering-like (BPF-like) deep reconstruction model and 
shown great potential on fast and accurate PET reconstruction. Although the two 
methods degenerate to an identical model at the time resolution of 0 ps, they 
represent two distinct approaches at the realistic time resolutions of current 
commercial systems. There is a lack of a systematic and fair assessment on these 
differences.
PURPOSE: This work aims to analyze the impact of back-projection variants on 
CNN-based PET image reconstruction to find the most effective back-projection 
model, and ultimately contribute to accurate PET reconstruction.
METHODS: Different back-projection strategies (CW and MLAP) and different 
angular view processing methods (view-summed and view-grouped) were considered, 
leading to the comparison of four back-projection variants integrated with the 
same CNN filtration model. Meanwhile, we investigated two strategies of physical 
effect compensation, either introducing pre-corrected data as the input or 
adding a channel of attenuation map to the CNN model. After training models 
separately on Monte-Carlo-simulated BrainWeb phantoms with full dose 
(events = 3×107), we tested them on both simulated phantoms and clinical brain 
scans with two dosage levels. For the performance assessment, peak 
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and root mean square error (RMSE) were used to 
evaluate the pixel-wise error, structural similarity index (SSIM) to evaluate 
the structural similarity, and contrast recovery coefficient (CRC) in manually 
selected ROI to compare the region recovery.
RESULTS: Compared to two MLAP-based histo-image reconstruction models, two 
CW-based back-projected image methods produced clearer, sharper, and more 
detailed images, from both simulated and clinical data. For angular view 
processing methods, view-grouped histo-image improved image quality, while 
view-grouped cwbp-image showed no advantage except for contrast recovery. 
Quantitative analysis on simulated data demonstrated that the view-summed 
cwbp-image model achieved the best PSNR, RMSE, SSIM, while the 8-view cwbp-image 
model achieved the best CRC in lesions and the white matter. Additionally, the 
multi-channel input model including the back-projection image and attenuation 
map was proved to be the most efficient and simplest method for compensating for 
physical effects for brain data. Applying Gaussian blur to the histo-image 
yielded images with limited improvement. All above results hold for both the 
half-dose and the full-dose cases.
CONCLUSION: For brain imaging, the evaluation based on metrics PSNR, RMSE, SSIM, 
and CRC indicates that the view-summed CW-based back-projection variant is the 
most effective input for the BPF-like reconstruction model using CNN filtration, 
which can involve the attenuation map through an additional channel to 
effectively compensate for physical effects.

© 2024 American Association of Physicists in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mp.17191
PMCID: PMC11489027
PMID: 38828883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors have 
no conflict of interest.


56. Sci Rep. 2024 Feb 26;14(1):4634. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-55183-6.

Semantic representation and comparative analysis of physical activity sensor 
observations using MOX2-5 sensor in real and synthetic datasets: a 
proof-of-concept-study.

Chatterjee A(1)(2), Gerdes MW(3), Prinz A(3), Riegler MA(4), Martinez SG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Holistic Systems, Simula Metropolitan Center for Digital 
Engineering, Oslo, Norway. ayan.chatterjee@uia.no.
(2)Department of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), Centre for 
E-Health, University of Agder, Grimstad, Norway. ayan.chatterjee@uia.no.
(3)Department of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), Centre for 
E-Health, University of Agder, Grimstad, Norway.
(4)Department of Holistic Systems, Simula Metropolitan Center for Digital 
Engineering, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Health and Nursing Science, Centre for E-Health, University of 
Agder, Grimstad, Norway.

The widespread use of devices like mobile phones and wearables allows for 
automatic monitoring of human daily activities, generating vast datasets that 
offer insights into long-term human behavior. A structured and controlled data 
collection process is essential to unlock the full potential of this 
information. While wearable sensors for physical activity monitoring have gained 
significant traction in healthcare, sports science, and fitness applications, 
securing diverse and comprehensive datasets for research and algorithm 
development poses a notable challenge. In this proof-of-concept study, we 
underscore the significance of semantic representation in enhancing data 
interoperability and facilitating advanced analytics for physical activity 
sensor observations. Our approach focuses on enhancing the usability of physical 
activity datasets by employing a medical-grade (CE certified) sensor to generate 
synthetic datasets. Additionally, we provide insights into ethical 
considerations related to synthetic datasets. The study conducts a comparative 
analysis between real and synthetic activity datasets, assessing their 
effectiveness in mitigating model bias and promoting fairness in predictive 
analysis. We have created an ontology for semantically representing observations 
from physical activity sensors and conducted predictive analysis on data 
collected using MOX2-5 activity sensors. Until now, there has been a lack of 
publicly available datasets for physical activity collected with MOX2-5 activity 
monitoring medical grade (CE certified) device. The MOX2-5 captures and 
transmits high-resolution data, including activity intensity, weight-bearing, 
sedentary, standing, low, moderate, and vigorous physical activity, as well as 
steps per minute. Our dataset consists of physical activity data collected from 
16 adults (Male: 12; Female: 4) over a period of 30-45 days (approximately 1.5 
months), yielding a relatively small volume of 539 records. To address this 
limitation, we employ various synthetic data generation methods, such as 
Gaussian Capula (GC), Conditional Tabular General Adversarial Network (CTGAN), 
and Tabular General Adversarial Network (TABGAN), to augment the dataset with 
synthetic data. For both the authentic and synthetic datasets, we have developed 
a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) classification model for accurately classifying 
daily physical activity levels. The findings underscore the effectiveness of 
semantic ontology in semantic search, knowledge representation, data 
integration, reasoning, and capturing meaningful relationships between data. The 
analysis supports the hypothesis that the efficiency of predictive models 
improves as the volume of additional synthetic training data increases. Ontology 
and Generative AI hold the potential to expedite advancements in behavioral 
monitoring research. The data presented, encompassing both real MOX2-5 and its 
synthetic counterpart, serves as a valuable resource for developing robust 
methods in activity type classification. Furthermore, it opens avenues for 
exploration into research directions related to synthetic data, including model 
efficiency, detection of generated data, and considerations regarding data 
privacy.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-55183-6
PMCID: PMC10897381
PMID: 38409365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


57. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2025 May 22;2024:551-560. eCollection 2024.

Enhancement of Fairness in AI for Chest X-ray Classification.

Jackson NJ(1), Yan C(2), Malin BA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(2)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN.

The use of artificial intelligence (AI) in medicine has shown promise to improve 
the quality of healthcare decisions. However, AI can be biased in a manner that 
produces unfair predictions for certain demographic subgroups. In MIMIC-CXR, a 
publicly available dataset of over 300,000 chest X-ray images, diagnostic AI has 
been shown to have a higher false negative rate for racial minorities. We 
evaluated the capacity of synthetic data augmentation, oversampling, and 
demographic-based corrections to enhance the fairness of AI predictions. We show 
that adjusting unfair predictions for demographic attributes, such as race, is 
ineffective at improving fairness or predictive performance. However, using 
oversampling and synthetic data augmentation to modify disease prevalence 
reduced such disparities by 74.7% and 10.6%, respectively. Moreover, such 
fairness gains were accomplished without reduction in performance (95% CI AUC: 
[0.816, 0.820] versus [0.810, 0.819] versus [0.817, 0.821] for baseline, 
oversampling, and augmentation, respectively).

©2024 AMIA - All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC12099404
PMID: 40417510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2023 Sep;104(9):1498-1513. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2023.02.004. Epub 2023 Mar 1.

Efficacy of Robot-Assisted Training on Rehabilitation of Upper Limb Function in 
Patients With Stroke: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Yang X(1), Shi X(2), Xue X(3), Deng Z(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Sports Medicine and Health, Chengdu Sport University, Chengdu, 
China.
(2)Hospital of Chengdu Office of People's Government of Tibetan Autonomous 
Region, Chengdu, China.
(3)Institute of Sports Medicine and Health, Chengdu Sport University, Chengdu, 
China. Electronic address: 390231882@qq.com.
(4)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Comment in
    Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2023 Nov;104(11):1970-1971. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2023.07.015.

OBJECTIVE: To systematically evaluate the effect of robot-assisted training 
(RAT) on upper limb function recovery in patients with stroke, providing the 
evidence-based medical basis for the clinical application of RAT.
DATA SOURCES: We searched online electronic databases up to June 2022, including 
PubMed, The Cochrane Library, Scopus, Web of Science, EMBASE, WanFang Data, 
CNKI, and VIP full-text databases.
STUDY SELECTION: Randomized controlled trials of the effect of RAT on upper 
extremity functional recovery in patients with stroke.
DATA EXTRACTION: The Cochrane Collaboration Tool for Assessing the Risk of Bias 
was used to assess study quality and risk of bias.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Fourteen randomized controlled trials involving 1275 patients 
were included for review. Compared with the control group, RAT significantly 
improved upper limb motor function and daily living ability. The overall 
differences were statistically significant, Fugl-Meyer Assessment for the Upper 
Extremity (FMA-UE; standard mean difference=0.69; 95% confidence interval, 0.34, 
1.05; P=.0001), modified Barthel Index (standard mean difference=0.95; 95% 
confidence interval, 0.75, 1.15; P<.00001), whereas the differences in modified 
Ashworth Scale, FIM, and Wolf Motor Function Test scores were not statistically 
significant.
SUBGROUP ANALYSIS: Compared with the control group, the differences between 
FMA-UE and modified Barthel Index at 4 and 12 weeks of RAT, there were 
statistically significant, the differences of FMA-UE and modified Ashworth Scale 
in patients with stroke in the acute and chronic phases were statistically 
significant.
CONCLUSION: The present study showed that RAT can significantly enhance the 
upper limb motor function and activities of daily life in patients with stroke 
undergoing upper limb rehabilitation.

Copyright © 2023 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apmr.2023.02.004
PMID: 36868494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Comput Biol Med. 2026 Mar;204:111558. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2026.111558. 
Epub 2026 Feb 19.

Enhancing survival analysis through federated learning in non-IID and scarce 
data scenarios.

Apellániz PA(1), Parras J(2), Zazo S(2).

Author information:
(1)Information Processing and Telecommunications Center, ETS Ingenieros de 
Telecomunicación, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040, Madrid, Spain. 
Electronic address: patricia.alonsod@upm.es.
(2)Information Processing and Telecommunications Center, ETS Ingenieros de 
Telecomunicación, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040, Madrid, Spain.

Integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI) into Survival Analysis (SA) has 
advanced predictive modeling in healthcare, enabling precise and personalized 
predictions of time-to-event outcomes, such as patient survival. However, 
real-world SA datasets often suffer from data scarcity, heterogeneity, and 
privacy constraints, which limit the applicability of traditional and modern AI 
methods. To address these challenges, we propose the Federated Synthetic Data 
Sharing (FedSDS) framework, which integrates synthetic data generation with 
Federated Learning (FL). For SA, we leverage SAVAE, a state-of-the-art model for 
complex datasets. Using the Variational Autoencoder-Bayesian Gaussian Mixture 
model enhanced with artificial inductive bias, FedSDS generates high-quality 
synthetic data locally and shares them among nodes, enabling collaborative model 
training without direct data sharing. FedSDS introduces a biased aggregation 
strategy that aligns synthetic data with local distributions, outperforming 
traditional FL methods, such as Federated Average. Validated under independent 
and identically distributed (IID) and non-IID scenarios, FedSDS mitigates data 
imbalances and heterogeneity, showing significant performance improvements in 
scarce and heterogeneous data. The proposed framework offers a scalable and 
privacy-preserving solution for SA in decentralized environments. By enhancing 
model generalizability and robustness, FedSDS provides a promising path forward 
for collaborative analytics in healthcare, paving the way for improved patient 
outcomes and greater adoption of federated techniques in real-world 
applications.

Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2026.111558
PMID: 41719633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Patricia A. Apellaniz reports that 
financial support was provided by Horizon Europe. If there are other authors, 
they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


60. Sensors (Basel). 2023 Oct 24;23(21):8691. doi: 10.3390/s23218691.

A Generative Adversarial Network to Synthesize 3D Magnetohydrodynamic 
Distortions for Electrocardiogram Analyses Applied to Cardiac Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging.

Mehri M(1)(2), Calmon G(1), Odille F(1)(3)(4), Oster J(3)(4), Lalande A(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Epsidy, 54000 Nancy, France.
(2)Ecole Nationale d'Ingénieurs de Sousse, LATIS-Laboratory of Advanced 
Technology and Intelligent Systems, Université de Sousse, 4023 Sousse, Tunisia.
(3)IADI-Imagerie Adaptative Diagnostique et Interventionnelle, Inserm U1254, 
Université de Lorraine, 54000 Nancy, France.
(4)CIC-IT 1433, Inserm, CHRU de Nancy, Université de Lorraine, 54000 Nancy, 
France.
(5)ICMUB Laboratory, CNRS 6302, University of Burgundy, 21000 Dijon, France.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging, University Hospital of Dijon, 21079 Dijon, 
France.

Recently, deep learning (DL) models have been increasingly adopted for automatic 
analyses of medical data, including electrocardiograms (ECGs). Large, available 
ECG datasets, generally of high quality, often lack specific distortions, which 
could be helpful for enhancing DL-based algorithms. Synthetic ECG datasets could 
overcome this limitation. A generative adversarial network (GAN) was used to 
synthesize realistic 3D magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) distortion templates, as 
observed during magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and then added to available 
ECG recordings to produce an augmented dataset. Similarity metrics, as well as 
the accuracy of a DL-based R-peak detector trained with and without data 
augmentation, were used to evaluate the effectiveness of the synthesized data. 
Three-dimensional MHD distortions produced by the proposed GAN were similar to 
the measured ones used as input. The precision of a DL-based R-peak detector, 
tested on actual unseen data, was significantly enhanced by data augmentation; 
its recall was higher when trained with augmented data. Using synthesized 
MHD-distorted ECGs significantly improves the accuracy of a DL-based R-peak 
detector, with a good generalization capacity. This provides a simple and 
effective alternative to collecting new patient data. DL-based algorithms for 
ECG analyses can suffer from bias or gaps in training datasets. Using a GAN to 
synthesize new data, as well as metrics to evaluate its performance, can 
overcome the scarcity issue of data availability.

DOI: 10.3390/s23218691
PMCID: PMC10649946
PMID: 37960391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


61. Med Phys. 2022 Aug;49(8):5014-5037. doi: 10.1002/mp.15787. Epub 2022 Jun 16.

Single-material beam hardening correction via an analytical energy response 
model for diagnostic CT.

Haase V(1)(2), Hahn K(1), Schöndube H(1), Stierstorfer K(1), Maier A(2), Noo 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)Siemens Healthcare GmbH, Forchheim, Germany.
(2)Pattern Recognition Lab, Department of Computer Science, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA.

BACKGROUND: Various clinical studies show the potential for a wider quantitative 
role of diagnostic X-ray computed tomography (CT) beyond size measurements. 
Currently, the clinical use of attenuation values is, however, limited due to 
their lack of robustness. This issue can be observed even on the same scanner 
across patient size and positioning. There are different causes for the lack of 
robustness in the attenuation values; one possible source of error is beam 
hardening of the X-ray source spectrum. The conventional and well-established 
approach to address this issue is a calibration-based single material beam 
hardening correction (BHC) using a water cylinder.
PURPOSE: We investigate an alternative approach for single-material BHC with the 
aim of producing a more robust result for the attenuation values. The underlying 
hypothesis of this investigation is that calibration-based BHC automatically 
corrects for scattered radiation in a manner that is suboptimal in terms of bias 
as soon as the scanned object strongly deviates from the water cylinder used for 
calibration.
METHODS: The approach we propose performs BHC via an analytical energy response 
model that is embedded into a correction pipeline that efficiently estimates and 
subtracts scattered radiation in a patient-specific manner prior to BHC. The 
estimation of scattered radiation is based on minimizing, in average, the 
squared difference between our corrected data and the vendor-calibrated data. 
The used energy response model is considering the spectral effects of the 
detector response and the prefiltration of the source spectrum, including a 
beam-shaping bowtie filter. The performance of the correction pipeline is first 
characterized with computer simulated data. Afterward, it is tested using real 
3-D CT data sets of two different phantoms, with various kV settings and phantom 
positions, assuming a circular data acquisition. The results are compared in the 
image domain to those from the scanner.
RESULTS: For experiments with a water cylinder, the proposed correction pipeline 
leads to similar results as the vendor. For reconstructions of a QRM liver 
phantom with extension ring, the proposed correction pipeline achieved a more 
uniform and stable outcome in the attenuation values of homogeneous materials 
within the phantom. For example, the root mean squared deviation between 
centered and off-centered phantom positioning was reduced from 6.6 to 1.8 HU in 
one profile.
CONCLUSIONS: We have introduced a patient-specific approach for single-material 
BHC in diagnostic CT via the use of an analytical energy response model. This 
approach shows promising improvements in terms of robustness of attenuation 
values for large patient sizes. Our results contribute toward improving CT 
images so as to make CT attenuation values more reliable for use in 
clinical practice.

© 2022 The Authors. Medical Physics published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf 
of American Association of Physicists in Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/mp.15787
PMCID: PMC9388575
PMID: 35651302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST V. Haase, K. Hahn, H. 
Schöndube, and K. Stierstorfer are employees of Siemens Healthcare GmbH, 
Germany. A. Maier is the principal investigator on a research agreement between 
Siemens Healthcare GmbH, Germany and the Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg. F. Noo is the principal investigator on a research agreement 
between Siemens Medical Solutions, USA and The University of Utah.


62. Comput Methods Programs Biomed. 2023 Dec;242:107855. doi: 
10.1016/j.cmpb.2023.107855. Epub 2023 Oct 12.

Bidimensional ensemble entropy: Concepts and application to emphysema lung 
computerized tomography scans.

Gaudêncio AS(1), Azami H(2), Cardoso JM(3), Vaz PG(3), Humeau-Heurtier A(4).

Author information:
(1)LIBPhys, Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, P-3004 516, 
Portugal; Univ Angers, LARIS, SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000 Angers, France. Electronic 
address: andreia.gaudencio@fis.uc.pt.
(2)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto Dementia Research Alliance, 
Univ Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)LIBPhys, Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, P-3004 516, 
Portugal.
(4)Univ Angers, LARIS, SFR MATHSTIC, F-49000 Angers, France.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Bidimensional entropy algorithms provide meaningful 
quantitative information on image textures. These algorithms have the advantage 
of relying on well-known one-dimensional entropy measures dedicated to the 
analysis of time series. However, uni- and bidimensional algorithms require the 
adjustment of some parameters that influence the obtained results or even 
findings. To address this, ensemble entropy techniques have recently emerged as 
a solution for signal analysis, offering greater stability and reduced bias in 
data patterns during entropy estimation. However, such algorithms have not yet 
been extended to their two-dimensional forms.
METHODS: We therefore propose six bidimensional algorithms, namely ensemble 
sample entropy, ensemble permutation entropy, ensemble dispersion entropy, 
ensemble distribution entropy, and two versions of ensemble fuzzy entropy based 
on different models or parameters initialization of an entropy algorithm. These 
new measures are first tested on synthetic images and further applied to a 
biomedical dataset.
RESULTS: The results suggest that ensemble techniques are able to detect 
different levels of image dynamics and their degrees of randomness. These 
methods lead to more stable entropy values (lower coefficients of variations) 
for the synthetic data. The results also show that these new measures can obtain 
up to 92.7% accuracy and 88.4% sensitivity when classifying patients with 
pulmonary emphysema through a k-nearest neighbors algorithm.
CONCLUSIONS: This is a further step towards the potential clinical deployment of 
bidimensional ensemble approaches to detect different levels of image dynamics 
and their successful performance on emphysema lung computerized tomography 
scans. These bidimensional ensemble entropy algorithms have potential to be used 
in various imaging applications thanks to their ability to distinguish more 
stable and less biased image patterns compared to their original counterparts.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmpb.2023.107855
PMID: 37852145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Andreia S. Gaudencio reports a 
relationship with Foundation for Science and Technology that includes: funding 
grants. Andreia S. Gaudencio reports a relationship with European Social Fund 
that includes: funding grants.


63. Med Image Anal. 2025 Oct;105:103728. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2025.103728. Epub 2025 
Jul 22.

Rethinking data imbalance in class incremental surgical instrument segmentation.

Zhao S(1), Bai L(2), Yuan K(3), Li F(4), Yu J(5), Dong W(6), Wang G(7), Hoque 
M(8), Padoy N(9), Navab N(10), Ren H(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK), Hong Kong. Electronic address: shifang.zhao@bjtu.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK), Hong Kong; Chair for Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Electronic address: 
b.long@link.cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Chair for Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany; University of Strasbourg, CNRS, INSERM, ICube, Strasbourg, 
France; IHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. Electronic address: kun.yuan@tum.de.
(4)Chair for Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: feng.li@tum.de.
(5)Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK), Hong Kong. Electronic address: jmyu@link.cuhk.edu.hk.
(6)Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK), Hong Kong. Electronic address: dongwz@link.cuhk.edu.hk.
(7)Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK), Hong Kong. Electronic address: gkwang@link.cuhk.edu.hk.
(8)UCL Hawkes Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: mobarakol.islam@ucl.ac.uk.
(9)University of Strasbourg, CNRS, INSERM, ICube, Strasbourg, France; IHU 
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. Electronic address: npadoy@unistra.fr.
(10)Chair for Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: nassir.navab@tum.de.
(11)Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK), Hong Kong. Electronic address: hlren@ee.cuhk.edu.hk.

In surgical instrument segmentation, the increasing variety of instruments over 
time poses a significant challenge for existing neural networks, as they are 
unable to effectively learn such incremental tasks and suffer from catastrophic 
forgetting. When learning new data, the model experiences a sharp performance 
drop on previously learned data. Although several continual learning methods 
have been proposed for incremental understanding tasks in surgical scenarios, 
the issue of data imbalance often leads to a strong bias in the segmentation 
head, resulting in poor performance. Data imbalance can occur in two forms: (i) 
class imbalance between new and old data, and (ii) class imbalance within the 
same time point of data. Such imbalances often cause the dominant classes to 
take over the training process of continual semantic segmentation (CSS). To 
address this issue, we propose SurgCSS, a novel plug-and-play CSS framework for 
surgical instrument segmentation under data imbalance. Specifically, we generate 
realistic surgical backgrounds through inpainting and blend instrument 
foregrounds with the generated backgrounds in a class-aware manner to balance 
the data distribution in various scenarios. We further propose the Class 
Desensitization Loss by employing contrastive learning to correct edge biases 
caused by data imbalance. Moreover, we dynamically fuse the weight parameters of 
the old and new models to achieve a better trade-off between the biased and 
unbiased model weights. To investigate the data imbalance problem in surgical 
scenarios, we construct a new benchmark for surgical instrument CSS by 
integrating four public datasets: EndoVis 2017, EndoVis 2018, CholecSeg8k, and 
SAR-RAPR50. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
framework, achieving significant performance improvement against existing 
baselines. Our method demonstrates excellent potential for clinical 
applications. The code is publicly available at github.com/Zzsf11/SurgCSS.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2025.103728
PMID: 40737814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


64. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2025 May 15;327:203-207. doi: 10.3233/SHTI250302.

Bias Detection in Histology Images Using Explainable AI and Image Darkness 
Assessment.

Skarga-Bandurova I(1), Sharifnia G(1), Biloborodova T(2).

Author information:
(1)Oxford Brookes University.
(2)G.E. Pukhov Institute for Modelling in Energy Engineering.

The study underscores the importance of addressing biases in medical AI models 
to improve fairness, generalizability, and clinical utility. In this paper, we 
present a novel framework that combines Explainable AI (XAI) with image darkness 
assessment to detect and mitigate bias in cervical histology image 
classification. Four deep learning architectures were employed-AlexNet, 
ResNet-50, EfficientNet-B0, and DenseNet-121-with EfficientNet-B0 demonstrating 
the highest accuracy post-mitigation. Grad-CAM and saliency maps were used to 
identify biases in the models' predictions. After applying brightness 
normalisation and synthetic data augmentation, the models shifted focus toward 
clinically relevant features, improving both accuracy and fairness. Statistical 
analysis using ANOVA confirmed a reduction in the influence of image darkness on 
model predictions after mitigation, as evidenced by a decrease in the 
F-statistic from 120.79 to 14.05, indicating improved alignment of the models 
with clinically relevant features.

DOI: 10.3233/SHTI250302
PMID: 40380414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Artif Intell Med. 2025 Dec;170:103281. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2025.103281. Epub 
2025 Oct 8.

Preprocessing narrative texts in electronic medical records to identify hospital 
adverse events: A scoping review.

Jafarpour H(1), Wu G(2), Cheligeer CK(3), Yan J(4), Xu Y(5), Southern DA(6), 
Eastwood CA(7), Zeng Y(8), Quan H(9).

Author information:
(1)Concordia University, Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science, 
Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering, 1515 Sainte Catherine 
West, Montreal, H3G 2W1, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
hamed.jafarpour@concordia.ca.
(2)University of Calgary, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming 
School of Medicine, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: Guosong.wu@ucalgary.ca.
(3)University of Calgary, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming 
School of Medicine, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: cheligeerken@ucalgary.ca.
(4)Concordia University, Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science, 
Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering, 1515 Sainte Catherine 
West, Montreal, H3G 2W1, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
jun.yan@concordia.ca.
(5)University of Calgary, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming 
School of Medicine, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: yuxu@ucalgary.ca.
(6)University of Calgary, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming 
School of Medicine, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: dasouthe@ucalgary.ca.
(7)University of Calgary, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming 
School of Medicine, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: caeastwo@ucalgary.ca.
(8)Concordia University, Gina Cody School of Engineering and Computer Science, 
Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering, 1515 Sainte Catherine 
West, Montreal, H3G 2W1, Quebec, Canada. Electronic address: 
yong.zeng@concordia.ca.
(9)University of Calgary, Department of Community Health Sciences, Cumming 
School of Medicine, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, T2N 1N4, Alberta, Canada. 
Electronic address: hquan@ucalgary.ca.

BACKGROUND: Narrative electronic medical records (EMR), which include textual 
notes created by clinicians within healthcare environments, represent a 
significant resource for documenting various facets of patient care. This form 
of text exhibits distinctive characteristics, such as the occurrence of 
grammatically incorrect sentences, abbreviations, frequent acronyms, specialized 
characters with particular meanings, negation expressions, and sporadic 
misspellings. As a result, a primary goal in processing these textual notes is 
to implement effective preprocessing techniques that enhance data quality and 
ensure consistency across all entries. Recent advancements in algorithms and 
methodologies within the fields of natural language processing (NLP), machine 
learning (ML), and large language models (LLM) have prompted researchers to 
leverage narrative EMR for the detection of hospital adverse events (HAE).
METHODS: The scoping review adhered to the PRISMA-ScR (Preferred Reporting Items 
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews) 
guidelines. A scoping review protocol was developed and utilized to guide the 
research process, clearly outlining the eligibility criteria, information 
sources, search strategies, data management, selection process, data collection 
procedures, data items, outcomes and prioritization, data synthesis, and 
meta-bias considerations. The search strategy was implemented across nine 
engineering and medical electronic databases.
RESULTS: The results have indicated that from a total of 3,264 studies 
retrieved, 48 unique studies were included in the review. Responses to the 
research questions were systematically extracted from these studies. The review 
has identified challenges associated with the preprocessing of narrative texts 
in EMR for HAE identification. Additionally, three research gaps have been 
identified: (1) the imperative need for a pipeline to preprocess narrative EMR 
for the identification of HAE, (2) the necessity for a robust system capable of 
managing the extensive volume of narrative EMR data, and (3) the requirement for 
temporal event system, which are essential for effective HAE detection. The 
study also has underscored the essential role of preprocessing tasks in 
enhancing the performance of HAE detection. The study has emphasized the 
importance of extracting N-grams from clinical text, normalizing these N-grams 
through lemmatization and/or stemming, and establishing semantic feature 
extraction in preprocessing tasks that significantly affect HAE detection 
performance. While LLM-based systems naturally incorporate tokenization and 
normalization processes within their frameworks, it remains crucial to address 
features that hold semantic relevance to the specific type of HAE during 
preprocessing.
CONCLUSION: This scoping review has provided valuable insights for researchers 
focused on HAE detection utilizing narrative EMR data. It has elucidated how 
preprocessing tasks can elevate the performance of HAE detection and draws 
attention to neglected research gaps within the field. Addressing these gaps 
will necessitate further investigation in subsequent research endeavors.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2025.103281
PMID: 41072367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Hude Quan’s report received funding 
from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. The authors declare that they 
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. If there are other 
authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or 
personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported 
in this paper.


66. Health Care Manag Sci. 2026 Feb 19;29(1):6. doi: 10.1007/s10729-025-09751-5.

Healthcare applications of 0-1 neural networks in prescriptive problems with 
observational data.

Patil V(1), Hoppe KK(2), Mintz Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Tepper School of Business, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, 
15213, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Maternal-Fetal Medicine, University of Wisconsin - Madison, 1010 Mound 
Street, 53715, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin - Madison, 1513 
University Avenue, 53706, Madison, WI, USA. ymintz@wisc.edu.

A key challenge in medical decision making is learning treatment policies for 
patients with limited observational data. This challenge is particularly evident 
in personalized healthcare decision-making, where models need to take into 
account the intricate relationships between patient characteristics, treatment 
options, and health outcomes. To address this, we introduce prescriptive neural 
networks (PNNs), shallow 0-1 neural networks trained with mixed integer 
programming that can be used with counterfactual estimation to optimize policies 
in medium data settings. These models offer greater interpretability than deep 
neural networks and can encode more complex policies than common models such as 
decision trees. We show that PNNs can outperform existing methods in both 
synthetic data experiments and in a case study of assigning treatments for 
postpartum hypertension. In particular, PNNs are shown to produce policies that 
could reduce peak blood pressure by 5.47 mm Hg (p=0.02) over existing clinical 
practice, and by 2 mm Hg (p=0.01) over the next best prescriptive modeling 
technique. Moreover PNNs were more likely than all other models to correctly 
identify clinically significant features while existing models relied on 
potentially dangerous features such as patient insurance information and race 
that could lead to bias in treatment.

© 2026. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10729-025-09751-5
PMCID: PMC12920400
PMID: 41712078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical Approval: We obtained 
institutional review board approval (#2016-006). Other data sets analyzed were 
already published and publicly available. Informed Consent: Individual patient 
consent was not required due to the retrospective study design. Prior to study 
analysis the dataset was de-identified. No compensation was provided to human 
subjects as this was a retrospective study that involved retrospective dataset 
development from the electronic medical records. Competing interests: 
Employment: None of the authors have relevant competing employment interests. 
Financial Interests: None of the authors have relevant competing financial 
interests. Non-financial Interests: None of the authors have relevant competing 
non-financial interests.


67. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2025 Feb 18;25(1):89. doi: 10.1186/s12911-024-02731-9.

How good is your synthetic data? SynthRO, a dashboard to evaluate and benchmark 
synthetic tabular data.

Santangelo G(1), Nicora G(2), Bellazzi R(2), Dagliati A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy. gabriele.santangelo01@universitadipavia.it.
(2)Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The exponential growth in patient data collection by healthcare 
providers, governments, and private industries is yielding large and diverse 
datasets that offer new insights into critical medical questions. Leveraging 
extensive computational resources, Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence 
are increasingly utilized to address health-related issues, such as predicting 
outcomes from Electronic Health Records and detecting patterns in multi-omics 
data. Despite the proliferation of medical devices based on Artificial 
Intelligence, data accessibility for research is limited due to privacy 
concerns. Efforts to de-identify data have met challenges in maintaining 
effectiveness, particularly with large datasets. As an alternative, synthetic 
data, that replicate main statistical properties of real patient data, are 
proposed. However, the lack of standardized evaluation metrics complicates the 
selection of appropriate synthetic data generation methods. Effective evaluation 
of synthetic data must consider resemblance, utility and privacy, tailored to 
specific applications. Despite available metrics, benchmarking efforts remain 
limited, necessitating further research in this area.
RESULTS: We present SynthRO (Synthetic data Rank and Order), a user-friendly 
tool for benchmarking health synthetic tabular data across various contexts. 
SynthRO offers accessible quality evaluation metrics and automated benchmarking, 
helping users determine the most suitable synthetic data models for specific use 
cases by prioritizing metrics and providing consistent quantitative scores. Our 
dashboard is divided into three main sections: (1) Loading Data section, where 
users can locally upload real and synthetic datasets; (2) Evaluation section, in 
which several quality assessments are performed by computing different metrics 
and measures; (3) Benchmarking section, where users can globally compare 
synthetic datasets based on quality evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: Synthetic data mitigate concerns about privacy and data 
accessibility, yet lacks standardized evaluation metrics. SynthRO provides an 
accessible dashboard helping users select suitable synthetic data models, and it 
also supports various use cases in healthcare, enhancing prognostic scores and 
enabling federated learning. SynthRO's accessible GUI and modular structure 
facilitate effective data evaluation, promoting reliability and fairness. Future 
developments will include temporal data evaluation, further broadening its 
applicability.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12911-024-02731-9
PMCID: PMC11837667
PMID: 39966793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests. Availability and 
requirements: Project name: SynthRO. Project home page: 
https://github.com/bmi-labmedinfo/SynthRO . Operating system(s): Platform 
independent. Programming language: Python 3.12. Other requirements: Refer to the 
GITHUB repository for package versions. License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 ( 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/?ref=chooser-v1 ). Any 
restrictions to use by non-academics: Non commercial.


68. BMJ Open. 2025 Sep 28;15(9):e103084. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2025-103084.

Role of artificial intelligence in virtual emergency care: a protocol for a 
systematic review.

Shankar R(1), Wang L(2), Hoe HS(2), Liew MF(3), Gollamudi SPK(4)(5), Wong 
S(2)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical Affairs - Research Innovation and Enterprise, Alexandra Hospital, 
Singapore, Alexandra Hospital, Singapore Ravi_SHANKAR@nuhs.edu.sg.
(2)Fast and Chronic Programmes, Alexandra Hospital, Singapore, Alexandra 
Hospital, Singapore.
(3)Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, National University Health System, 
Singapore.
(4)Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Division of Advanced Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, National 
University Hospital, Singapore, National University Hospital, Singapore.
(6)Division of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
National University Hospital, Singapore.

INTRODUCTION: Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to revolutionise 
healthcare delivery, particularly in the domain of emergency medicine. With the 
rise of telemedicine and virtual care, AI-powered tools could assist in triage, 
diagnosis and treatment recommendations for patients seeking emergency care 
remotely. This systematic review aims to synthesise the current state of 
research on AI applications in virtual emergency care, identify key challenges 
and opportunities and provide recommendations for future research and 
implementation.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will conduct a comprehensive search of multiple 
electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, CINAHL, MEDLINE, The 
Cochrane Library, Scopus) from each database's inception to March 2025. The 
search will include terms related to AI, machine learning, deep learning, 
virtual care, telemedicine and emergency medicine. We will include original 
research articles, conference proceedings and preprints that describe the 
development, validation or implementation of AI models for virtual emergency 
care. Two reviewers will independently screen titles and abstracts, review full 
texts, extract data and assess risk of bias using the PROBAST (Prediction model 
Risk Of Bias ASsessment Tool) tool for prediction model studies, Cochrane 
Risk-of-Bias tool for randomised trials for randomised trials and Risk Of Bias 
In Non-randomised Studies of Interventions for non-randomised studies. Data 
synthesis will involve a narrative review of included studies, summarising key 
findings, methodological approaches and implications for practice and research. 
The results will be reported according to the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: No ethical approval is required for this systematic 
review as it will use only published data. The findings will be disseminated 
through publication in a peer-reviewed journal, presentations at relevant 
conferences and engagement with clinicians, health system leaders, policymakers 
and researchers. This review will provide a timely and comprehensive overview of 
the applications of AI in virtual emergency care to inform evidence-based 
guidelines, policies and practices for leveraging these technologies to enhance 
access, quality and efficiency of emergency care delivery.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42025648202.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2025-103084
PMCID: PMC12481340
PMID: 41022432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


69. PLoS One. 2025 Mar 11;20(3):e0319583. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0319583. 
eCollection 2025.

Using statistical modelling and machine learning in detecting bone properties: A 
systematic review protocol.

Abdelhay O(1), Alshoubaki R(1), Murad S(1), Abdel-Hafez O(1), Abdelhay Q(2), 
Haddad B(3), Alhosanie T(3), Ajlouni H(3), Ajlouni L(3), Qarain T(3), Murad 
H(3), Altamimi T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Princess Sumaya 
University for Technology, Amman, Jordan.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Al-Bashir Hospital, Amman, Jordan.
(3)Division of Orthopaedic, Department of Special Surgery, School of Medicine, 
The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan.
(4)Software Engineering Department, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

INTRODUCTION: Osteoporosis, a common condition characterised by decreased bone 
mass and microarchitectural deterioration, leading to increased fracture risk, 
is a significant health concern. Traditional diagnostic methods, such as 
Dual-energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DXA), have limitations in sensitivity and 
accessibility. However, the emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) and 
machine learning (ML) has brought promising tools capable of analysing complex 
medical data to enhance the detection and prediction of osteoporosis-related 
bone properties. This systematic review protocol outlines the methodology to 
evaluate the application and effectiveness of AI and ML methods in detecting 
bone properties and osteoporosis. It underscores their potential to 
revolutionise healthcare by providing more accurate and accessible osteoporosis 
detection and prediction tools.
METHODS: This systematic review, which will follow the Preferred Reporting Items 
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) guidelines, will 
be comprehensive in its approach. A thorough search will be conducted across 
PubMed, Embase, IEEE Xplore, Scopus, Cochrane Library, and GitHub from their 
inception to March 2025. Studies involving adults aged 40 years and older that 
utilise AI/ML techniques to detect or predict bone density or other bone-related 
properties will be included. Two independent reviewers will perform screening, 
data extraction, and risk of bias assessments using appropriate tools such as 
RoB 2, ROBINS-I, QUADAS-2, PROBAST, and NOS. The comprehensive nature of this 
review ensures that no relevant study is overlooked. Data synthesis will involve 
narrative synthesis and, if applicable, meta-analysis using Review Manager 
(RevMan) and R software.
DISCUSSION: This systematic review will comprehensively evaluate current AI and 
ML applications in detecting bone properties and osteoporosis. By identifying 
and analysing various AI/ML models and comparing them with traditional 
diagnostic methods, the review aims to highlight the effectiveness and potential 
of these technologies in clinical practice. The findings are expected to 
significantly impact healthcare professionals, researchers, and policymakers 
regarding advancements in AI/ML for bone health assessment and guide future 
research directions. Understanding the strengths and limitations of existing 
studies will be crucial in developing standardised protocols and facilitating 
the integration of AI/ML tools into routine osteoporosis screening and 
management.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: This Systematic Review Protocol was registered 
in PROSPERO (CRD42024587326).

Copyright: © 2025 Abdelhay et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0319583
PMCID: PMC11896029
PMID: 40067789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


70. Eur J Radiol. 2025 Nov;192:112409. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2025.112409. Epub 2025 
Sep 6.

Reference standard methodology in the clinical evaluation of AI chest X-ray 
algorithms for lung cancer detection: A systematic review.

Duncan SF(1), Kidd AC(2), Lampignano JP(3), Cannon P(4), Hall M(5), Stobo DB(5), 
Maclay JD(6), Blyth KG(7), Lowe DJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Digital Health Validation Lab, University of Glasgow, Imaging Centre of 
Excellence, Langlands Dr, Glasgow G51 4LB, UK; The Beatson West of Scotland 
Cancer Center, 1053 Great Western Rd, Glasgow G12 0YN, UK.
(2)The Beatson West of Scotland Cancer Center, 1053 Great Western Rd, Glasgow 
G12 0YN, UK; School of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, 
Switchback Road, Bearsden G61 1QH, UK.
(3)University of Glasgow Library, Hillhead St, Glasgow G12 8QE, UK; Radiology 
Department, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, 1345 Govan Rd, Glasgow G51 4TF, UK.
(4)University of Glasgow Library, Hillhead St, Glasgow G12 8QE, UK.
(5)Radiology Department, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, 1345 Govan Rd, Glasgow 
G51 4TF, UK.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, 84 Castle St, 
Glasgow G4 0SF, UK.
(7)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Switchback 
Road, Bearsden G61 1QH, UK; CRUK Scotland Centre, Switchback Rd, Bearsden, 
Glasgow G61 1BD, UK; Glasgow Pleural Disease Unit, NHS Greater Glasgow and 
Clyde, 1345 Govan Rd, Glasgow G51 4TF, UK.
(8)Digital Health Validation Lab, University of Glasgow, Imaging Centre of 
Excellence, Langlands Dr, Glasgow G51 4LB, UK; Emergency Department, Queen 
Elizabeth University Hospital, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, 1345 Govan Rd, 
Glasgow G51 4TF, UK. Electronic address: David.lowe@glasgow.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death worldwide, 
with early diagnosis linked to improved survival. Artificial intelligence (AI) 
holds promise for augmenting radiologists' workflows in chest X-ray (CXR) 
interpretation, particularly for detecting thoracic malignancies. However, 
clinical implementation of this technology relies on robust and standardised 
reference standard methodology at the patient-level.
PURPOSE: This systematic review aims to describe reference standard methodology 
in the clinical evaluation of CXR algorithms for lung cancer detection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Searches targeted studies on AI CXR analysis across 
MEDLINE, Embase, CENTRAL, and trial registries. 2 reviewers independently 
screened titles and abstracts, with disagreements resolved by a 3rd reviewer. 
Studies lacking external validation in real-world cohorts were excluded. Bias 
was assessed using a modified QUADAS-2 tool, and data synthesis followed SWiM 
guidelines.
RESULTS: 1,679 papers were screened with 46 papers included for full paper 
review. 24 different AI solutions were evaluated across a broad range of 
research questions. We identified significant heterogeneity in reference 
standard methodology, including variations in target abnormalities, reference 
standard modality, expert panel composition, and arbitration techniques. 25 % of 
reference standard parameters were inadequately reported. 66 % of included 
studies demonstrated high risk of bias in at least one domain.
DISCUSSION: To our knowledge, this is the first systematic description of 
patient-level reference standard methodology in CXR AI analysis of thoracic 
malignancy. To facilitate translational progress in this field, researchers 
undertaking evaluations of diagnostic algorithms at the patient-level should 
ensure that reference standards are aligned with clinical workflows and adhere 
to reporting guidelines. Limitations include a lack of prospective studies.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2025.112409
PMID: 40961741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: David Lowe reports a relationship 
with Qure.ai Technologies Private Limited that includes: funding grants and 
travel reimbursement. DJL has received consultancy honoraria from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, AstraZeneca (paid to his institution) consultancy for Novo Nordisk 
Foundation and research grants from AstraZeneca, Qure.ai, Roche. He has had 
travel support from Qure.ai and has serves on advisory board for British Telecom 
(Health). If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


71. Eur Radiol Exp. 2025 Jan 15;9(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s41747-024-00543-0.

Differences in technical and clinical perspectives on AI validation in cancer 
imaging: mind the gap!

Chouvarda I(1), Colantonio S(2), Verde ASC(3), Jimenez-Pastor A(4), 
Cerdá-Alberich L(5), Metz Y(6), Zacharias L(7), Nabhani-Gebara S(8), Bobowicz 
M(9), Tsakou G(10), Lekadir K(11)(12), Tsiknakis M(13), Martí-Bonmati L(5)(14), 
Papanikolaou N(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, 
Greece. ioannach@auth.gr.
(2)Institute of Information Science and Technologies of the National Research 
Council of Italy, Pisa, Italy.
(3)Computational Clinical Imaging Group (CCIG), Champalimaud Research, 
Champalimaud Foundation, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)Quibim SL, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Biomedical Imaging Research Group (GIBI230), La Fe Health Research Institute, 
Valencia, Spain.
(6)Data Analysis and Visualization, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Kingston University London, London, UK.
(8)Faculty of Health, Science, Social Care & Education, Kingston University 
London, London, UK.
(9)2nd Department of Radiology, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.
(10)Research and Development Lab, Gruppo Maggioli Greek Branch, Maroussi, 
Greece.
(11)Departament de Matemàtiques i Informàtica, Artificial Intelligence in 
Medicine Lab (BCN-AIM), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Computational BioMedicine Laboratory (CBML), Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas (FORTH), Heraklion, Greece.
(14)Radiology Department, La Fe Polytechnic and University Hospital and Health 
Research Institute, Valencia, Spain.

Good practices in artificial intelligence (AI) model validation are key for 
achieving trustworthy AI. Within the cancer imaging domain, attracting the 
attention of clinical and technical AI enthusiasts, this work discusses current 
gaps in AI validation strategies, examining existing practices that are common 
or variable across technical groups (TGs) and clinical groups (CGs). The work is 
based on a set of structured questions encompassing several AI validation 
topics, addressed to professionals working in AI for medical imaging. A total of 
49 responses were obtained and analysed to identify trends and patterns. While 
TGs valued transparency and traceability the most, CGs pointed out the 
importance of explainability. Among the topics where TGs may benefit from 
further exposure are stability and robustness checks, and mitigation of fairness 
issues. On the other hand, CGs seemed more reluctant towards synthetic data for 
validation and would benefit from exposure to cross-validation techniques, or 
segmentation metrics. Topics emerging from the open questions were utility, 
capability, adoption and trustworthiness. These findings on current trends in AI 
validation strategies may guide the creation of guidelines necessary for 
training the next generation of professionals working with AI in healthcare and 
contribute to bridging any technical-clinical gap in AI validation. RELEVANCE 
STATEMENT: This study recognised current gaps in understanding and applying AI 
validation strategies in cancer imaging and helped promote trust and adoption 
for interdisciplinary teams of technical and clinical researchers. KEY POINTS: 
Clinical and technical researchers emphasise interpretability, 
external validation with diverse data, and bias awareness in AI validation for 
cancer imaging. In cancer imaging AI research, clinical researchers prioritise 
explainability, while technical researchers focus on transparency and 
traceability, and see potential in synthetic datasets. Researchers advocate for 
greater homogenisation of AI validation practices in cancer imaging.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s41747-024-00543-0
PMCID: PMC11735720
PMID: 39812924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: AJ-P is affiliated with Quibim SL. The remaining authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


72. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2021 Aug;110(2):380-391. doi: 10.1002/cpt.2240. Epub 2021 
Apr 19.

Sex-Specific Classification of Drug-Induced Torsade de Pointes Susceptibility 
Using Cardiac Simulations and Machine Learning.

Fogli Iseppe A(1), Ni H(1), Zhu S(1), Zhang X(1), Coppini R(2), Yang PC(3), 
Srivatsa U(4), Clancy CE(1)(3), Edwards AG(1), Morotti S(1), Grandi E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Davis, California, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Sciences and Child Health 
(NeuroFarBa), University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Physiology and Membrane Biology, University of California, 
Davis, California, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of California, Davis, California, 
USA.

Torsade de Pointes (TdP), a rare but lethal ventricular arrhythmia, is a toxic 
side effect of many drugs. To assess TdP risk, safety regulatory guidelines 
require quantification of hERG channel block in vitro and QT interval 
prolongation in vivo for all new therapeutic compounds. Unfortunately, these 
have proven to be poor predictors of torsadogenic risk, and are likely to have 
prevented safe compounds from reaching clinical phases. Although this has 
stimulated numerous efforts to define new paradigms for cardiac safety, none of 
the recently developed strategies accounts for patient conditions. In 
particular, despite being a well-established independent risk factor for TdP, 
female sex is vastly under-represented in both basic research and clinical 
studies, and thus current TdP metrics are likely biased toward the male sex. 
Here, we apply statistical learning to synthetic data, generated by simulating 
drug effects on cardiac myocyte models capturing male and female 
electrophysiology, to develop new sex-specific classification frameworks for TdP 
risk. We show that (i) TdP classifiers require different features in females vs. 
males; (ii) male-based classifiers perform more poorly when applied to female 
data; and (iii) female-based classifier performance is largely unaffected by 
acute effects of hormones (i.e., during various phases of the menstrual cycle). 
Notably, when predicting TdP risk of intermediate drugs on female simulated 
data, male-biased predictive models consistently underestimate TdP risk in 
women. Therefore, we conclude that pipelines for preclinical cardiotoxicity risk 
assessment should consider sex as a key variable to avoid potentially 
life-threatening consequences for the female population.

© 2021 The Authors. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics © 2021 American Society 
for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1002/cpt.2240
PMCID: PMC8316283
PMID: 33772748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declared no 
competing interests for this work.


73. J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2025 Sep;19(5):1341-1352. doi: 
10.1177/19322968241248402. Epub 2024 Apr 29.

Supervised and Unsupervised Approaches for the Real-Time Detection of Undesired 
Insulin Suspension Caused by Malfunctions.

Idi E(1), Facchinetti A(1), Sparacino G(1), Del Favero S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Automated insulin delivery (AID) systems, permit improved treatment 
of type 1 diabetes (T1D). Unfortunately, malfunctioning in the insulin pump or 
in the infusion set can prevent insulin from being administered, reducing the 
AID efficacy and posing the patient at risk. Different data-driven methods 
available in the literature can be used to deal with the problem of 
automatically detecting complete insulin suspension in real-time. This article 
investigates both supervised and unsupervised strategies and proposes a fair 
comparison under either population or personalized settings.
METHODS: Several algorithms are compared using data generated through the 
UVA/Padova T1D simulator, a computer simulator widely used to test control 
strategies in silico and accepted by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as 
a substitute to animal pre-clinical trials. Two synthetic data sets, each 
consisting of 100 virtual subjects monitored for 1 month, were generated. 
Occasional faults of the insulin pump are simulated as complete occlusions by 
suspending the therapy administration. Personalized algorithms are investigated 
with unsupervised approaches only, since personalized labels are hardly 
available.
RESULTS: In the population scenario, the supervised approach outperforms the 
unsupervised strategy. In particular, logistic regression and random forest 
achieves a recall of 72% and 82%, with 0.12 and 0.21 false positives (FP) per 
day, respectively. In the personalized setting scenario, the unsupervised 
algorithms are tailored on each patient and outperform the population ones, in 
particular isolation forest achieves a recall 80% and 0.06 FPs per day.
CONCLUSIONS: This article suggests that unsupervised personalized approach, by 
addressing the large variability in glucose response among individuals with T1D, 
is superior to other one-fits-all approaches in detecting insulin suspensions 
caused by malfunctioning. Population methodologies can be effectively used while 
waiting to collect sufficient patient data, when the system is installed on a 
new patient.

DOI: 10.1177/19322968241248402
PMCID: PMC11571563
PMID: 38682800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.


74. Int J Popul Data Sci. 2024 Nov 20;9(2):2439. doi: 10.23889/ijpds.v9i2.2439. 
eCollection 2024.

I-SIRch: AI-powered concept annotation tool for equitable extraction and 
analysis of safety insights from maternity investigations.

Singh MK(1)(2), Cosma G(1)(2), Waterson P(3), Back J(4), Jun GT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, School of Science, Loughborough University, 
Loughborough, United Kingdom.
(2)These authors contributed equally to this work.
(3)School of Design and Creative Arts, Loughborough University, Loughborough, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Health Services Safety Investigations Body (HSSIB), United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Maternity care is a complex system involving treatments and 
interactions between patients, healthcare providers, and the care environment. 
To enhance patient safety and outcomes, it is crucial to understand the human 
factors (e.g. individuals' decisions, local facilities) influencing healthcare. 
However, most current tools for analysing healthcare data focus only on 
biomedical concepts (e.g. health conditions, procedures and tests), overlooking 
the importance of human factors.
METHODS: We developed a new approach called I-SIRch, using artificial 
intelligence to automatically identify and label human factors concepts in 
maternity investigation reports describing adverse maternity incidents produced 
by England's Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch (HSIB). These incident 
investigation reports aim to identify opportunities for learning and improving 
maternal safety across the entire healthcare system. Unlike existing clinical 
annotation tools that extract solely biomedical insights, I-SIRch is uniquely 
designed to capture the socio-technical dimensions of patient safety incidents. 
This innovation enables a more comprehensive analysis of the complex systemic 
issues underlying adverse events in maternity care, providing insights that were 
previously difficult to obtain at scale. Importantly, I-SIRch employs a hybrid 
approach, incorporating human expertise to validate and refine the AI-generated 
annotations, ensuring the highest quality of analysis.
FINDINGS: I-SIRch was trained using real data and tested on both real and 
synthetic data to evaluate its performance in identifying human factors 
concepts. When applied to real reports, the model achieved a high level of 
accuracy, correctly identifying relevant concepts in 90% of the sentences from 
97 reports (Balanced Accuracy of 90% ± 18% (Recall 93% ± 18%, Precision 87% ± 
34%, F-score 96% ± 10%). Applying I-SIRch to analyse these reports revealed that 
certain human factors disproportionately affected mothers from different ethnic 
groups. In particular, gaps in risk assessment were more prevalent for minority 
mothers, whilst communication issues were common across all groups but 
potentially more for minorities.
INTERPRETATION: Our work demonstrates the potential of using automated tools to 
identify human factors concepts in maternity incident investigation reports, 
rather than focusing solely on biomedical concepts. This approach opens up new 
possibilities for understanding the complex interplay between social, technical 
and organisational factors influencing maternal safety and population health 
outcomes. By taking a more comprehensive view of maternal healthcare delivery, 
we can develop targeted interventions to address disparities and improve 
maternal outcomes. Targeted interventions to address these disparities could 
include culturally sensitive risk assessment protocols, enhanced language 
support, and specialised training for healthcare providers on recognising and 
mitigating biases. These findings highlight the need for tailored approaches to 
improve equitable care delivery and outcomes in maternity services. The I-SIRch 
framework thus represents a significant advancement in our ability to extract 
actionable intelligence from healthcare incident reports, moving beyond 
traditional clinical factors to encompass the broader systemic issues that 
impact patient safety.

DOI: 10.23889/ijpds.v9i2.2439
PMCID: PMC11986904
PMID: 40225881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: On behalf of all authors, 
the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.


75. PLoS One. 2025 Sep 26;20(9):e0321440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0321440. 
eCollection 2025.

Partial verification bias correction using scaled inverse probability resampling 
for binary diagnostic tests.

Arifin WN(1), Yusof UK(2).

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics and Research Methodology Unit, School of Medical Sciences, 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia.
(2)Albukhary International University, Alor Setar, Kedah, Malaysia.

Diagnostic accuracy studies are crucial for evaluating new tests before their 
clinical application. These tests are compared with gold standard tests, and 
accuracy measures such as sensitivity (Sn) and specificity (Sp) are often 
calculated. However, these studies frequently suffer from partial verification 
bias (PVB) due to selective verification of patients, which leads to biased 
accuracy estimates. Among the methods for correcting PVB under the 
missing-at-random assumption for binary diagnostic tests, a bootstrap-based 
method known as the inverse probability bootstrap (IPB) was proposed. IPB 
demonstrated low bias for estimating Sn and Sp, but exhibited higher standard 
errors (SE) than other PVB correction methods and only corrected the 
distribution of the verified portion of the PVB data. This paper introduces two 
new methods to address these limitations: scaled inverse probability weighted 
resampling (SIPW) and scaled inverse probability weighted balanced resampling 
(SIPW-B), both built upon IPB. Using simulated and clinical datasets, SIPW and 
SIPW-B were compared against IPB and other existing methods (Begg and Greenes', 
inverse probability weighting estimator, and multiple imputation). For the 
simulated data sets, different combinations of disease prevalence (0.4 and 0.1), 
Sn (0.3 to 0.9), Sp (0.6 and 0.9), and sample sizes (200 and 1000) were 
generated. Two commonly used clinical datasets in PVB correction studies were 
also used. Performance was evaluated using bias and SE for the simulated data. 
Simulation results showed that both new methods outperformed IPB by producing 
lower bias and SE for Sn and Sp estimation, showing results comparable to 
existing methods, and demonstrating good performance at low disease prevalence. 
In clinical datasets, SIPW and SIPW-B were consistent with existing methods. The 
new methods also improve upon IPB by allowing full data restoration. Although 
the methods are computationally demanding at present, this limitation is 
expected to become less important as computing power continues to increase.

Copyright: © 2025 Arifin, Yusof. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0321440
PMCID: PMC12469146
PMID: 41004551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


76. J Biomed Inform. 2025 Nov;171:104932. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104932. Epub 2025 
Oct 17.

Towards a Biological Evaluation Framework for Oversampling (BEFO) gene 
expression data.

Fee K(1), Jain S(2), Murphy RG(3), Jurek-Loughrey A(4).

Author information:
(1)Queen's University Belfast School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, 16A Malone Rd, Belfast, BT9 5BN, Ulster, Northern Ireland, UK. 
Electronic address: kfee04@qub.ac.uk.
(2)Queen's University Belfast Johnston Cancer Research Centre, 97 Lisburn Rd, 
Belfast, BT9 7AE, Ulster, Northern Ireland, UK.
(3)The Centre for Genomic Medicine, Ulster University, Coleraine, Northern 
Ireland, UK.
(4)Queen's University Belfast School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science, 16A Malone Rd, Belfast, BT9 5BN, Ulster, Northern Ireland, UK.

Machine learning (ML) techniques are progressively being used in biomedical 
research to improve diagnostic and prognostic accuracy when used in conjunction 
with a clinician as a decision support system. However, many datasets used in 
biomedical research often suffer from severe class imbalance due to small 
population sizes, which causes machine learning models to become biased to 
majority class samples. Current oversampling methods primarily focus on 
balancing datasets without adequately validating the biological relevance of 
synthetic data, risking the clinical applicability of downstream model 
predictions. To address these shortcomings, we propose the Biological Evaluation 
Framework for Oversampling (BEFO) designed to ensure that synthetic gene 
expression samples accurately reflect the biological patterns present in 
original datasets. This innovation not only mitigates bias but enhances the 
trustworthiness of predictive models in clinical scenarios. We have developed a 
ranking method for synthetic samples based on this and evaluated each sample's 
inclusion based on its rank. This ranking method calculates the WGCNA gene 
co-expression clusters on the original dataset. Several random forests are 
constructed to assess the alignment of each synthetic sample to each cluster. 
Only synthetic samples more important than real samples are included in a study. 
The experimental results demonstrate that our proposed ML oversampling framework 
can improve the biological feasibility of oversampled datasets by an average of 
11%, leading to improved classification performance by an average of 9% when 
compared against five state-of-the-art (SOTA) oversampling methods and ten 
classification algorithms across six real world gene expressions datasets. 
Thereby establishing a new standard for synthetic data evaluation in biomedical 
ML applications.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104932
PMID: 41110738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


77. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2025 Summer;27(1):101866. doi: 
10.1016/j.jocmr.2025.101866. Epub 2025 Feb 21.

DENSE-SIM: A modular pipeline for the evaluation of cine displacement encoding 
with stimulated echoes images with sub-voxel ground-truth strain.

Barbaroux H(1), Loecher M(2), Brackenier Y(3), Kunze KP(4), Neji R(5), Pennell 
DJ(6), Ennis DB(7), Nielles-Vallespin S(8), Scott AD(9), Young AA(10).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK; Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital 
(Guy's and St Thomas's NHS Foundation Trust), London, UK. Electronic address: 
hugo.barbaroux@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 
Electronic address: mloecher@stanford.edu.
(3)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK. Electronic address: yannick.brackenier@kcl.ac.uk.
(4)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK; MR Research Collaborations, Siemens Healthcare Limited, Camberley, 
UK. Electronic address: karl-philipp.kunze@siemens-healthineers.com.
(5)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College London, 
London, UK. Electronic address: radhouene.neji@siemens-healthineers.com.
(6)Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital (Guy's and St 
Thomas's NHS Foundation Trust), London, UK; National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, UK. Electronic address: DJ.Pennell@rbht.nhs.uk.
(7)Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA; 
Division of Radiology, Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Palo Alto, 
California, USA. Electronic address: dbe@stanford.edu.
(8)Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital (Guy's and St 
Thomas's NHS Foundation Trust), London, UK; National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
S.Nielles-Vallespin@rbht.nhs.uk.
(9)Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital (Guy's and St 
Thomas's NHS Foundation Trust), London, UK; National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
a.scott07@imperial.ac.uk.
(10)School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King's College 
London, London, UK. Electronic address: alistair.young@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Myocardial strain is a valuable biomarker for diagnosing and 
predicting cardiac conditions, offering additional prognostic information to 
traditional metrics such as ejection fraction. While cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance (CMR) methods, particularly cine displacement encoding with stimulated 
echoes (DENSE), are the gold standard for strain estimation, evaluation of 
regional strain estimation requires precise ground truth. This study introduces 
DENSE-SIM, an open-source simulation pipeline for generating realistic cine 
DENSE images with high-resolution known ground-truth strain, enabling evaluation 
of accuracy and precision in strain analysis pipelines.
METHODS: This pipeline is a modular tool designed for simulating cine DENSE 
images and evaluating strain estimation performance. It comprises four main 
modules: 1) anatomy generation, for creating end-diastolic cardiac shapes; 2) 
motion generation, to produce myocardial deformations over time and Lagrangian 
strain; 3) DENSE image generation, using Bloch equation simulations with 
realistic noise, spiral sampling, and phase cycling; and 4) strain evaluation. 
To illustrate the pipeline, a synthetic dataset of 180 short-axis slices was 
created and analyzed using the commonly used DENSEanalysis tool. The impact of 
the spatial regularization parameter (k) in DENSEanalysis was evaluated against 
the ground-truth pixel strain, to particularly assess the resulting bias and 
variance characteristics.
RESULTS: Simulated strain profiles were generated with a myocardial 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) ranging from 3.9 to 17.7. For end-systolic radial 
strain, DENSEanalysis average signed error (ASE) in Green strain ranged from 
0.04 ± 0.09 (true-calculated, mean ± std) for a typical regularization 
(k = 0.9), to -0.01 ± 0.21 at low regularization (k = 0.1). Circumferential 
strain ASE ranged from -0.00 ± 0.04 at k = 0.9 to -0.01 ± 0.10 at k = 0.1. This 
demonstrates that the circumferential strain closely matched the ground truth, 
while radial strain displayed more significant underestimations, particularly 
near the endocardium. A lower regularization parameter from 0.3 to 0.6 depending 
on the myocardial SNR would be more appropriate to estimate the radial strain, 
as a compromise between noise compensation and global strain accuracy.
CONCLUSION: Generating realistic cine DENSE images with high-resolution 
ground-truth strain and myocardial segmentation enables accurate evaluation of 
strain analysis tools, while reproducing key in-vivo acquisition features, and 
will facilitate the future development of deep-learning models for myocardial 
strain analysis, enhancing clinical CMR workflows.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocmr.2025.101866
PMCID: PMC12032873
PMID: 39988298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interests The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Hugo Barbaroux reports financial 
support was provided by Siemens Healthcare Limited. Dudley J. Pennell reports 
financial support was provided by Siemens Healthcare Limited. Dudley J. Pennell 
reports financial support was provided by Cardiovascular Imaging Solutions. Karl 
P. Kunze reports a relationship with Siemens Healthcare Limited that includes 
employment. The other authors declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.


78. Curr Med Imaging. 2025;21:e15734056363870. doi: 
10.2174/0115734056363870250804215311.

GRMA-Net: A novel two-stage 3D Semi-supervised Pneumonia Segmentation based on 
Dual Multiscale Uncertainty Estimation with Graph Reasoning in Chest CTs.

Zang J(1), Gu Y(1), Yang L(1), Zhang B(2), Wang J(3), Lu X(1), Li J(1), Liu 
X(1), Zhao Y(1), Yu D(2), Tang S(1)(4), He Q(5).

Author information:
(1)Inner Mongolia Key Laboratory of Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Image 
Processing, School of Digital and Intelligent Industry, Inner Mongolia 
University of Science and Technology, Baotou, 014010, China.
(2)School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, Inner Mongolia University of 
Science and Technology, Baotou, 014010, China.
(3)School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, 
Beijing 100081, China.
(4)School of Computer Science and Technology, Baotou Medical College, Inner 
Mongolia University of Science and Technology, Baotou, 014040, China.
(5)School of Humanities and Law, Inner Mongolia University of Science and 
Technology, Baotou, 014010, China.

INTRODUCTION: This study aims to propose and evaluate a two-stage 
semi-supervised segmentation framework with dual multiscale uncertainty 
estimation and graph reasoning, addressing the challenges of obtaining 
high-precision pixel-level labels and effectively utilizing unlabeled data for 
accurate pneumonia lesion segmentation.
METHODS: First, we design a guided supervised training strategy for modeling 
aleatoric uncertainty (AU) at dual scales, reducing the impact on segmentation 
performance caused by aleatoric uncertainties introduced by blurred lesions and 
their boundaries in the image. Second, we design a training strategy for 
multi-scale noisy pseudo-label correction to reduce the cognitive bias problem 
caused by unreliable predictions in the model. Finally, we design a new 
combination of fused feature interaction graph reasoning (FIGR) and attention 
modules, which enables the network model to better capture image features in 
small infected regions.
RESULTS: Our study was validated using the MosMedData public dataset. The 
proposed algorithm improves the performance by 1.25%, 1.03%, 2.98%, and 0.59% on 
Dice, Jaccard, normalized surface dice (NSD), and average distance of boundaries 
(ADB), respectively, compared to the baseline model.
DISCUSSION: Our semi-supervised pneumonia segmentation framework, through 
two-stage multi-scale uncertainty estimation and modeling, significantly 
improves segmentation performance by leveraging unlabeled data and addressing 
uncertainties, offering clinical benefits in pneumonia diagnosis while facing 
challenges in generalization and computational efficiency that future work will 
target with GAN-based data synthesis and architecture optimization.
CONCLUSION: It can be convincingly concluded that the proposed algorithm is of 
profound importance and value in the domain of clinical practice.

DOI: 10.2174/0115734056363870250804215311
PMID: 40798947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. BMJ Open. 2026 Mar 18;16(3):e114803. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2025-114803.

Long-term infection risks in haematological cancer survivors compared with 
individuals with no cancer history: protocol for a systematic review aided by 
artificial intelligence-based methods.

Wilson W(1), Forbes H(2), Hazell M(2), Hopkins L(2), Funston G(3), O'Reilly 
M(4)(5), Bhaskaran K(2), Carreira H(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Non-Communicable Diseases Epidemiology, London School of 
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK william.wilson1@lshtm.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Non-Communicable Diseases Epidemiology, London School of 
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(3)Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.
(4)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Infections are a major cause of morbidity and mortality among 
individuals with haematological cancers, but the duration of elevated risk in 
long-term survivors remains uncertain. Although previous attempts to summarise 
the existing literature on this topic would have been hampered by the sheer 
volume of studies on cancer and all-cause infections, emerging artificial 
intelligence tools now offer the ability to streamline the screening process, 
allowing for broader and more comprehensive reviews.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This protocol follows the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis Protocols guidelines. Eligible studies will 
include original observational data reporting long-term (≥1 year follow-up from 
diagnosis) infection-related outcomes in haematological cancer survivors 
compared with a general or cancer-free population. Screening will be supported 
by ASReview, an artificial intelligence-based tool for abstract prioritisation. 
An internal validation step will be conducted by comparing artificial 
intelligence-assisted screening results with manual review performed by two 
independent researchers on a subset of abstracts. The primary outcomes of 
infection incidence and infection mortality will be summarised by type of 
infection, type of haematological cancer and time since cancer diagnosis. 
Information on anti-cancer treatments received will also be described. Data 
synthesis will be mostly narrative due to the broad scope of the review, though 
meta-analyses will be performed in cases where studies are sufficiently 
homogenous. Risk of bias will be assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval is not applicable to this study. The 
results of the review will be disseminated to clinical audiences and submitted 
to a peer-reviewed journal.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD420251047091.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2026. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2025-114803
PMCID: PMC13007171
PMID: 41857835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.